Golos (TV series)

The Voice (Russian: Голос) is a Russian singing competition television series broadcast on Channel One. Based on the original The Voice of Holland, it has aired six seasons and aims to find currently unsigned singing talent (solo or duets, professional and amateur) contested by aspiring singers, age 17 or over, drawn from public auditions. The winner is determined by television viewers voting by telephone, SMS text, and The Voice App. The winners of the seven seasons have been: Dina Garipova, Sergey Volchkov, Alexandra Vorobyova, Hieromonk Fotiy, Darya Antonyuk, Selim Alakhyarov, and Petr Zakharov.
The series employs a panel of four coaches who critique the artists' performances and guide their teams of selected artists through the remainder of the season. They also compete to ensure that their act wins the competition, thus making them the winning coach. The original panel featured Dima Bilan (seasons 1–3, 5–6), Pelageya (seasons 1–3, and 6), Alexander Gradsky (seasons 1–4, and 6), and Leonid Agutin (seasons 1–3, 5–6); the panel for the current eighth season features Valery Syutkin (season 8), Polina Gagarina (seasons 4–5 and 8), Sergey Shnurov (seasons 7–8), and Konstantin Meladze (seasons 7–8). Other coaches from previous seasons include Basta (seasons 4 and 7), Grigory Leps (seasons 4–5), and Ani Lorak (season 7).
The Voice began airing on October 5, 2012, as an autumn-winter TV season programme. The show proved to be a hit for Channel One. On April 5, 2019, Channel One renewed the series through its eighth season that premiered on October 11, 2019.


== Conception ==
An adaptation of the Dutch show The Voice of Holland, Channel One announced the show under the name Голос (The Voice).
In each season, the winner receives ₽1,000,000 (≈$16,000) and a record deal with Universal Music Group.


== Selection process and format ==
Blind auditionsEach season begins with the "Blind Auditions," where coaches form their team of artists (12 artists in season 1 and seasons 7–8) 14 artists in seasons 2–6) whom they mentor through the remainder of the season. (There was a rule in seasons 3–5 that coach who complete his/her team firstly can add to his/her team still one artist). The coaches' chairs are faced towards the audience during artists' performances; those interested in an artist press their button, which turns their chair towards the artist and illuminates the bottom of the chair to read "Я выбираю тебя" ("I Want You"). At the conclusion of the performance, an artist either defaults to the only coach who turned around or selects his or her coach if more than one coach expresses interest.

BattlesIn the "Battle Rounds," each coach pairs two of his or her team members to perform together, then chooses one to advance in the competition. In season 1, coaches were assisted by celebrity mentors. In the first season, coaches sit alongside their respective advisors in the battle stage. A new element was added in season two; coaches were given two "steals", allowing each coach to select two individuals who were eliminated during a battle round by another coach. However, in the seventh season (just like in the first season) each coach can't steal artists.

KnockoutsIn the Knockout Rounds, a pair of artists within a team are selected to sing individual performances in succession. They are not told until a few minutes prior to their performances who their partner is. At the conclusion of the performances, coaches would decide which one of each pair gets to advance to the next round. Starting with season two each coach pairs three artists into one knockout with two contestants from the trio advance to the next round. However, since season 7 only one contestant from the trio advances to the Top 12. But the coaches were given one "steal" (just like in the previous seasons' Battles). 

Live showsIn the final live performance phase of the competition, artists perform in weekly shows, where public voting and coaches' decision s narrow to a final group of artists and eventually declares a winner. In season one the coaches have the power to save one artist that had not received the public's vote in the Quarterfinal. In later seasons artists were saved by Votes' summa (Public's vote + Coach's vote). In deciding who moves on to the final four phase, the television audience and the coaches have equal say. With one team member remaining for each coach, the contestants compete against each other in the finale, where the outcome is decided solely by public vote. One contestant from each team would advance to the final four.

AdditionSince season 7, alongside the determining of the winner, television viewers vote for the best season coach using The Voice App and HbbTV option in their TV sets.


== Coaches and presenter ==


=== Coaches timeline ===
Coaches gallery
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


=== Presenter ===
Presenter
		


== Series overview ==


== Season synopses ==
Names in bold type indicate the winner of the season.


=== Season 1 (2012) ===

The first season of The Voice premiered on October 5, 2012, and concluded on December 29. The coaching panel consisted of Dima Bilan, Pelageya, Alexander Gradsky, and Leonid Agutin. Dmitry Nagiev appeared as the host. Contestant auditions were held in Moscow in September 2012.
Each coach was allowed to advance three top to the live shows:

Four finalists were advanced to the final round. Dina Garipova was announced as the winner of the season, while Elmira Kalimullina, Anastasia Spiridonova, and Margarita Pozoyan placed second, third, and fourth, respectively.


=== Season 2 (2013) ===

Season two premiered on September 6, 2013 and concluded on December 27. All personnel returned from the previous season.
Each coach was allowed to advance six top to the live shows

Four finalists were advanced to the final round. Sergey Volchkov was announced as the winner of the season, while Nargiz Zakirova, Gela Guralia, and Tina Kuznetsova placed second, third, and fourth, respectively.


=== Season 3 (2014) ===

Season three premiered on September 5, 2014 and concluded on December 26. All personnel returned from the previous season.
Each coach was allowed to advance six top to the live shows:

Four finalists were advanced to the final round. Alexandra Vorobyova was announced as the winner of the season, while Yaroslav Dronov, Alexander Bon, and Mariam Merabova placed second, third, and fourth, respectively.


=== Season 4 (2015) ===

Season four premiered on September 4, 2015 and concluded on December 25. The coaching panel was modified for the first time in the series' history, with Basta, Polina Gagarina, and Grigory Leps replacing Bilan, Pelageya and Agutin. Dmitry Nagiev continued appearing for his respective position.
Each coach was allowed to advance six top to the live shows:

Four finalists were advanced to the final round. Hieromonk Fotiy was announced as the winner of the season, while Mikhail Ozerov, Olga Zadonskaya, and Era Kann placed second, third, and fourth, respectively.


=== Season 5 (2016) ===

Season five premiered on September 2, 2016 and concluded on December 30. The coaching panel was modified for the second time in the series' history, with Dima Bilan and Leonid Agutin replacing Basta and Gradsky. Dmitry Nagiev continued appearing for his respective position.
Each coach was allowed to advance six top to the live shows:

Four finalists were advanced to the final round. Darya Antonyuk was announced as the winner of the season, while Aleksandr Panayotov, Kayrat Primberdiev, and Sardor Milano placed second, third, and fourth, respectively.


=== Season 6 (2017) ===

Season six premiered on September 1, 2017 and concluded on December 29. The original coaching panel reinstated with the returns of Pelageya and Alexander Gradsky, who rejoined Dima Bilan and Leonid Agutin. Dmitry Nagiev continued appearing for his respective position.
Each coach was allowed to advance six top to the live shows:

Four finalists were advanced to the final round. Selim Alakhyarov was announced as the winner of the season, while Timofey Kopylov, Ladislav Bubnar, and Yang Ge placed second, third, and fourth, respectively.


=== Season 7 (2018–2019) ===

Season seven premiered on October 12, 2018. Dmitry Nagiev continued appearing for his respective position. Basta returned as the coach after a two season-break. Ani Lorak, Sergey Shnurov, and Konstantin Meladze replaced Pelageya, Gradsky and Agutin as new coaches for the show.Each coach was allowed to advance two plus one top to the live shows:

Four finalists were advanced to the final round. Petr Zakharov was announced as the winner of the season, while Amirkhan Umaev, Rushana Valieva, and Shaen Oganesyan placed second, third, and fourth, respectively.


=== Season 8 (2019–2020) ===

Season eight premiered on October 11, 2019. Dmitry Nagiev returned for his 8th season as the presenter. Polina Gagarina returned as coach after a two season-break, while Valery Syutkin replaced Basta as a new coach. They both was joined by returning coaches Sergey Shnurov and Konstantin Meladze.Each coach will be allowed to advance two plus one top to the live shows:

Four finalists will be advanced to the final round.


== Reception ==


=== Seasons average: Ratings ===
The first season premiered on October 5, 2012 with a 5.5 rating in the 18-49 demographic. For its average season rating, the show was in the Top 5 at a 7.73 ranking.
The second season premiered on September 6, 2013 with a 9.5 in the 18–49 demographic. It was up from last season's premiere by 4.0 rating scores.
The third season premiered on September 5, 2014 with a 7.9 in the 18-49 demographic. It was down from last season's premiere by 1.6 rating scores.
The fourth season premiered on September 4, 2015 with an 8.4 in the 18-49 demographic. It was up from last season's premiere by .5 rating scores.
The fifth season premiered on September 2, 2016 with a 6.8 in the 18-49 demographic. It was down from last season's premiere by 1.6 rating scores.
The sixth season premiered on September 1, 2017 with a 6.5 in the 18-49 demographic. It was down from last season's premiere by .3 rating scores.
The seventh season premiered on October 12, 2018 with a 5.2 in the 18-49 demographic. It was down from last season's premiere by 1.3 rating scores. This is the lowest rated season premiere to date.
The eighth season premiered on October 11, 2019 with a 5.9 in the 18-49 demographic. It was up from last season's premiere by .7 rating scores.

Each Russian network television season starts in late August and ends in late May.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website