Golos (film)

The Voice (Russian: Голос, romanized: Golos), is a 1982 Soviet psychological drama film. Based on the screenplay of the same name by Natalya Ryazantseva and directed by Ilya Averbakh. This is the last film by director Ilya Averbakh.


== Plot ==
Actress Yulia Martynova (Natalya Sayko) is starring in a new film, but in the middle of the film production she is suddenly hospitalized with a serious illness. Film director (Leonid Filatov) is emotionally involved, he becomes frustrated, but the actress comes back from her hospital bed to the studio to continue her work in post-production. Yulia cannot imagine her character speaking with a voice of another actress, so she is dealing with her condition, taking drugs to overcome her pain, in order to contribute her original voice to the film. Cast and crew members are helping the star to overcome, and her original voice brings new depth and meaning to the film, after her death.


== Cast ==
Natalya Sayko as Yulia Martynova
Leonid Filatov as Film director
Grigori Kalatozishvili as Writer
Yelizaveta Nikishchikhina  as Anna Viktorova
Vsevolod Shilovsky as Cameraman
Sergei Bekhterev as Composer
Petr Shelokhonov as Production director
Vasili Bochkarev as Arkady
Yelena Safonova as Sveta
Tatyana Kravchenko as Nadya
Tatyana Pankova as art director
Georgy Berezovsky as sound technician
Tatyana Lavrova as Akhtyrskaya
Mikhail Gluzsky as Pavel Platonovich
Tatyana Rodionova as Film editor
Alla Osipenko as Yulia's neighbor
Boris Eifman
Olga Narutskaya
Andrei Urgant
Nina Usatova
Marina Yurasova


== Production ==
Film Golos (Russian: ГОЛОС) was produced by the Lenfilm studios in Leningrad (St. Petersburg), Russia, former USSR. Filming locations were in the city of Leningrad (St. Petersburg) and its suburbs, as well as in Moscow. Postproduction was made at the Lenfilm studios. Production dates were from October 1980 to October 1982.


== Reception ==
Film was released on 18 December 1982, in Leningrad (St. Petersburg), with the premiere at the "Dom Kino" (House of Film) in Leningrad. Attendance was 2,3 million viewers internationally in the first year, since the release. Film was released in East Germany on 28 October 1983, with narration and subtitles in German.


== Facts and connections ==
Original director's cut was 93 minutes, currently available copies are reduced to 87 min.
This was the first Soviet film openly dealing with drug and alcohol abuse among Soviet actors, alluding to artists struggling with the system. The title, Golos (meaniing Voice), has allusion to the voice of Vladimir Vysotsky, a dissident star actor and singer who died at age 42, in 1980. Director Ilya Averbakh knew Vysotsky, so the film Golos was made to support those with independent mind and voice.
Director Ilya Averbakh died aged 51, three years after the film was released.
Director Ilya Averbakh was a medical doctor, before he became a film director, so he had additional professional knowledge and understanding about stress and pressures on independent minds in the Soviet Union.
Intellectuals and film critics in Russia argued that director Ilya Averbakh expressed his view on the state of affairs in the Soviet Union, where independent minds were not allowed to speak openly with their own voice.
Film "Golos" was released after the death of Leonid Brezhnev when the KGB chief Yuri Andropov came to power in the Soviet Union.


== External links ==
Golos on IMDb
The Voice at AllMovie
Film Golos (The Voice) cast and crew on ssees.ac.uk [1] (English)
Film "Die Stimme" cast and synopsis [2] (German)
Film Golos (Russian: Голос) cast, crew and synopsis on Kinoexpert.ru [3] (Russian)
Director Ilya Averbakh's bio and film Golos (Russian: Голос) cast, crew and synopsis [4] (Russian)