Adalbert of Egmond

Saint Adalbert of Egmond (also called Adelbert of Egmond) (died c. 710 in Egmond) was a Northumbrian Anglo-Saxon missionary. He was one of Saint Willibrord's companions in preaching the gospel in Holland and Frisia.


== Biography ==
The Life of Adalbert is not rich in fact. He is said to have been born in Northumbria, a member of the Northumbrian royal family. According to some sources, to have been first a monk at the Rath Melsigi) and to have studied in Ireland with Egbert. He then went in c 690 to assist Saint Willibrord (who had also been at Rathmelsigi) in the mission field of Frisia, where he became associated particularly with Egmond. He was made Archdeacon of the recently founded See of Utrecht and died at Egmund about A.D. 740.  He was buried there, and miracles were reported at his tomb, over which a church was built.


== Veneration ==
His continued remembrance rests largely on the foundation of the Benedictine monastery, Egmond Abbey, the first in the country, some two hundred years later by Count Dirk I of West Frisia (or Holland), of which Adalbert was made the patron. The Vita was not commissioned until the 990s, which presumably accounts for its lack of facts. Adalbert's relics were translated to the newly built abbey (initially a nunnery) for veneration. After the Reformation and the destruction of the abbey, they were preserved in Haarlem. The cult was reinstated when the abbey was re-founded in 1923, and the relics were returned there in 1984. The saint's skull, painstakingly restored, is also preserved beneath the high altar. His feast day is 25 June.


== Notes ==


== References ==
Rose, Hugh James (1857). "Adelbert". A New General Biographical Dictionary. 1  AA–ANS. London: B. Fellowes et al.


== External links ==
Utopia article
Life of Adalbert, website of Egmond Abbey, in Dutch
Detailed consideration of the legend and relics of Adelbert, in DutchAttribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Stephen, Leslie, ed. (1885). "Adalbert (fl.700)". Dictionary of National Biography. 1. London: Smith, Elder & Co.