Wellington Street (Hamilton, Ontario)

Wellington Street is a Lower City arterial road in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. It starts off at Charlton Avenue East as a two-way street for only one block where it's then blocked off by the Corktown Park and a couple of Canadian National Railway lines that cut through it. It then starts up again north of the park on Young Street and is a one-way street the rest of the way (Southbound). It ends in the North End of the City on Burlington Street East, in front of the Lakeport Brewing Company and the Administration offices of the Hamilton Port Authority.


== History ==

Originally Wellington Street was called Lovers' Lane.The Hamilton General Hospital is major teaching hospital on the corners of Barton Street East and Wellington Street North in downtown Hamilton, Ontario that is affiliated with McMaster University. It is sometimes referred to as "HGH" and was founded in 1848.The David Braley Cardiac, Vascular and Stroke Research Institute is a $90-million Research Centre that will be home to 500+ scientists and will be built right behind the Hamilton General Hospital. The new building with 165,000 square feet (15,300 m2) is expected to open in 2010. At least 250 new jobs will be added to the local economy. David Braley contributed $10-million towards the project. Braley's donation marks an important transition in Hamilton's economy, as he takes money he made in the industrial economy and uses it to help the community develop a more diverse economic base. David Braley is the president of auto-parts manufacturer Orlick Industries Ltd., former owner of the Hamilton Tiger-Cats and current owner of the B.C. Lions.

In 1856, the Daniel C. Gunn Engine Shop on Wellington Street North, produced the first Canadian-built locomotives. In 1976, First Place apartments, a seniors high rise at King and Wellington opened on the site of First United Church, which burned down in 1969.Lakeport Brewing Company is based in Hamilton and focused on producing value-priced quality beer for the Ontario take-home market. Lakeport pioneered the "24 for $24" value segment. Lakeport produces nine proprietary beer brands, two of which, Lakeport Honey Lager and Lakeport Pilsener, are two of the top ten selling brands in the province of Ontario. Lakeport has more than 200 employees at its production facility. It is one of the fastest growing companies in the Hamilton region. Lakeport Brewing Company joined forces with the Hamilton Port Authority who will finance and construct a 35,000 square foot (3,250 m²) expansion to Lakeport's Hamilton harbour front facility. Lakeport Brewing Company is Canada's No.1 co-packer of beer, non-alcohol and spirit-based products. The company is also said to be North America's most modernized beverage alcohol production facility. On Monday May 8, Labatt Brewing Company made it official and announced that Lakeport, who they purchased earlier in the year, (March 29, 2007), for $200-million for rights to the income trust, which controlled the plant, will continue to operate in the City of Hamilton. It will continue to operate in Hamilton as they believe it is a "viable plant" and "the company is proud to integrate it with Labbat's." The operations employees continue to brew Lakeport in Hamilton but the marketing and sales jobs are now centralized at Labatt's head offices.Kenesky Sports on Barton & Wellington Streets is the site where Emile "Pops" Kenesky invented the hockey goalie pads in 1917. His new pads were cricket pads, modified, and widened to approximately 12 inches. The new pads caught on extremely quickly, and this style of pad was used by a majority of pro goalies right on to the 1970s. NHL greats like Johnny Bower, Jacques Plante and Terry Sawchuk having worn them. Kenesky's company became the best-known manufacturer of hockey equipment in Canada. Also a hockey school for hockey goalies of all-ages. Alumni include NHLers Ray Emery and Dwayne Roloson.


== Landmarks ==
Note: Listing of Landmarks from North to South.

Pier 10
Hamilton Port Authority, Administration Office
Lakeport Brewing Company
Canadian National railway tracks
Hamilton General Hospital
David Braley Cardiac, Vascular and Stroke Research Institute
Kenesky Sports & Cycle Co. Ltd.
Wellington Park
First Place Hamilton, Seniors apartment building
Corktown Park
Escarpment Rail Trail (abandoned railway path)
Bruce Trail
Niagara Escarpment (mountain)


== Communities ==
Note: Listing of neighbourhoods from North to South
North End - Everything north of the Canadian National Railway tracks
Beasley/ Landsdale, Wellington Street is the division between these two neighbourhoods.
Corktown, Stinson, Wellington Street is the division between these two neighbourhoods.


== Major intersecting roads ==
Note: Listing of streets from North to South.

Burlington Street East
Barton Street East
Cannon Street East - One-way street (Westbound only)
Wilson Street - One-way street (Eastbound Only)
King William Street - One-way street (Eastbound Only)
King Street East - One-way street (Westbound Only)
Main Street East - One-way street (Eastbound Only)
Jackson Street East
Hunter Street East - One-way street (Westbound Only)
Charlton Avenue East


== Parallel roads ==
Note: Listing of streets from West to East.

MacNab Street, North, South
James Street, North, South
Hughson Street, North, South
John Street, North, South
Catharine Street, North, South
Ferguson Avenue, North, South
Wellington Street, North, South
Victoria Avenue, North, South
Wentworth Street, North, South
Sherman Avenue, North, South
Gage Avenue, North, South
Ottawa Street, North, South
Kenilworth Avenue, North, South


== Images ==

		
		
		


== See also ==
Niagara Escarpment Commission


== References ==

MapArt Golden Horseshoe Atlas - Page 647 - Grids E13, F13, G13, H13


== External links ==
Beasley Neighbourhood (ourbeasley.com)
North End Neighbours
Bruce Trail Association
Hikes on the Bruce Trail
Google Maps: Wellington Street (Hybrid)