Vinay Sahasrabuddhe

Vinay Prabhakar Sahasrabuddhe is an Indian politician and Member of Parliament of India representing state of Maharashtra in the Rajya Sabha. He is also serving as National Vice President of Bharatiya Janata Party. Mr. Sahasrabuddhe has been appointed as President of Indian Council for Cultural Relations by President of India. He is known as a political scholar and an occasional columnist. He is the Vice Chairman of Rambhau Mhalgi Prabodhini, a research and training academy for elected representatives & social activists.  He heads BJP's think tank Public Policy Research Centre.


== Early life and education ==
Sahasrabuddhe was born in a middle-class Maharashtrian family on 10 November 1957 in Nashik. He started his schooling in Dhule, a native place of Sahasrabuddhes and later at Trimbak Vidya Mandir near Nashik. While in 4th standard, he gave a competitive examination and got selected for Government Public School, Nashik (Shaskiya Vidya Niketan).
In February 2009, Sahasrabuddhe was awarded a Ph.D by the University of Mumbai.


== Political career ==
He started his career in public life with Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP), a student's organization ideologically connected with Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). He worked as a full-time activist of ABVP during 1983 to 1985. In 1988, Sahasrabuddhe joined Rambhau Mhalgi Prabodhini(RMP) as principal functionary. For over 18 years, he was a Member of Senate of the University of Mumbai. He is also a Member of the Board of Governors of Sardar Patel Institute of Public Administration in Ahmedabad. In May 2002, he led the mission of Indian Voluntary Organisations to Afghanisthan.He is a national Vice-President of BJP and behind the scene, he is considered as one of the key members of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)'s think tank. He is the Chief of BJP backed think tank Public Policy Research Centre(PPRC) which is  based in Delhi. When Nitin Gadkari was appointed as president of BJP in the year 2009, Sahasrabuddhe served as Gadkari's political advisor. Within BJP, he   initiated training of 125 ministers from BJP-ruled states in year 2010 was one among it. In March 2012, his name was in news as one of the contenders for the Rajya Sabha nomination from the BJP for a seat vacated by BJP veteran late Balavant Apte. He was the member of BJP's Vision Document Committee for the 2014 Indian general election. Vinay Sahasrabuddhe is also In-Charge of BJP, Madhya Pradesh. Currently, He is a Member of Parliament from Maharashtra in the Rajya Sabha. He also mentors a youth-centred policy think tank, Vision India Foundation.


== Literary works ==
He authored a book Beyond A Billion Ballots, which was first published on 27 June 2013 in Mumbai. The book also launched at New Delhi at the hands of Former Chief Election Commissioner of India Dr. SY Quraishi. He has been an occasional contributor to many English and Marathi language newspapers and weeklies. He has also authored few Books in Marathi language which includes Ekaki Purvanchal, a book on North-East states of India. In 1998, Sahasrabuddhe received the award for best literary work from the Government of Maharashtra for his co-edited work Nivadak Manoos, a book in Marathi language.


== References ==


== External links ==
Vinay Sahasrabuddhe on Facebook
Vinay Sahasrabuddhe on Twitter