Gang Busters (serial)

Gang Busters is a 1942 Universal movie serial based on the radio series Gang Busters.


== Plot ==
The city is terrorized by a crime wave masterminded by the elusive, soft-spoken Professor Mortis (Ralph Morgan) from his base in a forgotten cavern beneath the rails of the city's subway line. Following the murder of his brother, police detective Bill Bannister (Kent Taylor), his partner Tim Nolan (Robert Armstrong), and police chief Martin O'Brien (Joseph Crehan) focus investigation on the activities of Mortis and his gang, and discover that the crimes were all perpetrated by men who had died some time ago, with new identities and kept alive by a formula of Mortis's invention. Following the story is journalist Vicki Logan (Irene Hervey) and her photographer 'Happy' Haskins (Richard Davies).


== Cast ==
Starring:

Kent Taylor as Det. Lt. Bill Bannister
Irene Hervey as Vicki Logan, girl reporter
Ralph Morgan as Professor Mortis
Robert Armstrong as Det. Tim NolanFeaturing:

Richard Davies as Happy Haskins, news photographer
Joseph Crehan as Police Chief Martin O'Brien
George Watts as Mayor Hansen
Ralf Harolde as Chief Henchman Halliger
William Haade as Henchman Mike Taboni
John Gallaudet as Henchman Wilkerson
George J. Lewis as Henchman Mason
Victor Zimmerman as Henchman Bernard
Johnnie Berkes as Newsboy-Henchman Grubb
Edward Emerson as "Frenchy" LudocWith:

Pat O'Malley as the Police Scientist
Beatrice Roberts as the Chief's Secretary
Riley Hill as Jim Bannister (Ch. 1)
Unknown Actor as Henchman Jake Jordan (Ch. 1)
Eddie Dean as Blair, ballistics expert (Chs. 1, 6)
Eddie Foster as Henchman Jerry Rogan (Chs. 3-4)
Unknown Actor as Henchman Batty Simms (Ch. 4)
Stanley Price as Henchman Corky Watts (Chs. 4-5)
Mickey Simpson as Bruiser, Ludoc's bouncer (Ch. 7)
Karl Hackett as Henry, crooked watchman (Chs. 7-8)
Phil Warren as Henchman McKay (Chs. 8-9)
Jack Mulhall as Chemist Richards (Chs. 9, 11)
Jerry Jerome as Henchman Soupy Collins (Chs. 10-11)
Paul McVey as Attorney J.B. "Harry" Malloy (Ch. 12)


== Production ==
Gang Busters is one of Universal's most elaborate serials, with many chase and thrill scenes expertly staged in outdoor locations. The directors were Ray Taylor, veteran director responsible for many hit serials, and Noel M. Smith, former silent-screen director who specialized in fast action (Smith directed many of Larry Semon's action-filled comedies of the 1920s).
This is mostly a crime film but contains a small science fiction element.  The villains, The League of Murdered Men, are all dead criminals killed and revived by Professor Mortis using his own mysterious poison.


== Critical reception ==
The film was very successful in its original release, and was re-released in 1949 by Sherman S. Krellberg's Filmcraft Productions.
Within serial fandom,  Jim Harmon and Donald F. Glut in the 1970s described Gang Busters as a "well made and interesting serial.", and Cline in 1984 wrote that he considered the serial is one of Universal's best and that Professor Mortis is one of the best characters ever created for a serial.


== Chapter titles ==
The League of Murdered Men
The Death Plunge
Murder Blockade
Hangman's Noose
Man Undercover
Under Crumbling Walls
The Water Trap
Murder by Proxy
Gang Bait
Mob Vengeance
Wanted at Headquarters
The Long Chance
Law and OrderSource:


== See also ==
List of film serials by year
List of film serials by studio


== References ==


== External links ==
Gang Busters on IMDb
Gang Busters at AllMovie