Purolator Inc.

Purolator Inc. is a Canadian courier that is 91% owned by Canada Post, 7% owned by Rainmaker Investments Ltd. and 2% by others.

The company was originally organized as Trans Canada Couriers, Ltd.  In 1967, it was acquired by the US manufacturer of oil and air filters Purolator of Fayetteville, North Carolina (founded as Motor Improvements Incorporated in 1923)—the name was originally an abbreviated form of "pure oil later".  In 1987, the company returned to Canadian ownership. Although it retained the Purolator name, it has since had no connection with the oil filter business.
Purolator has partnered with UPS for deliveries outside of Canada.
Cargojet operates Boeing 757 and Boeing 767 aircraft for Purolator.


== Corporate Citizenship ==
In 2003, the Purolator Tackle Hunger initiative was created by company employees to address food insecurity and has since delivered over 18 million meals to food banks across Canada.  Purolator has also refurbished and donated 20 curbside delivery vehicles to Canadian food banks and food organizations as part of the Purolator Tackle Hunger initiative.  The Canadian Football League is a partner in the Purolator Tackle Hunger initiative and raises awareness through Game Day Drives.  Annually, during the first week of June, the Purolator Tackle Hunger Week is held to raise awareness of food insecurity and collect donations.


== Unicell Quicksider ==

On September 24, 2007, Purolator Inc. introduced the Unicell Quicksider, a prototype full-electric vehicle, lightweight urban delivery vehicle, developed by a consortium led by Toronto-based Unicell Limited in partnership with ArvinMeritor, Battery Engineering and Test Services Inc.; Bodycote Material Testing; Electrovaya Inc.; PMG Technologies Inc.; Purolator Courier Ltd.; Southwestern Energy; and the Transportation Development Centre of Transport Canada.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Purolator Freight website
Purolator E-Ship Web Services (EWS)