World Electronic Music Festival

The World Electronic Music Festival (WEMF) was an electronic music event held annually in Northern Ontario over a period of three days. It was run by Destiny Productions out of Toronto, but is now presented by Rogers WBO Sessions. In summer of 2008 Destiny put on what was said to be their last WEMF in Madawaska, however the event had returned in 2011.


== History ==
This festival was developed in 1995. At that time it was named "The World Trance Festival" which 2 years later was changed to The World Electronic Music Festival or WEMF. The festival ran from Friday through Sunday on an annual basis from 1995 to 2008 with attendance reaching 15,000 at its peak. With the popularity of EDM waning in the late 2000s, the festival took a 2-year hiatus in 2009 & 2010 but returned with a bang in 2011 and sold out its visually stunning but remote 5,000 person venue.

WEMF (Destiny 10) 1995 took place at Mosport International Raceway in the center of the large race track from Friday, July 14 to Sunday July 16. A tornado ripped through the middle of it, destroying one of two sound stages and many people's tents went airborne. However, nobody was hurt and the festival made a debut. The first year featured John The Dentist, Evil Eddie Richards, Dr. Trance and many more.
WEMF (Destiny 15) 1996 took place at a campground in Oro Medonte Township near Barrie, Ontario from Friday July 12 to Sunday July 14 and was a co-production with Toronto's Industry Nightclub.
WEMF (Destiny 20) 1997 took place on private land just outside Orillia, Ontario
WEMF (Destiny 25) 1998 took place at Christian Island near Midland, Ontario from Friday, July 17 to Sunday, July 19
WEMF 1999 took place at White Sands, Sauble Beach near Owen Sound, Ontario from Friday, July 16 to Sunday, July 18
WEMF 2000 took place at Dunnville Airport in Dunnville, Ontario from Friday, July 14 to Sunday July 16
WEMF 2001 took place on private property in Bobcaygeon, Ontario from Friday, July 21 to Sunday, July 23
WEMF 2002 took place on private property in Bobcaygeon, Ontario from Friday, August 2 to Sunday August 4
WEMF 2003 took place at Trudeau Park in Tweed, Ontario from Friday, July 25 to Sunday, July 27
WEMF 2004 took place at Wasaga Beach in Wasaga Beach, Ontario from Sunday, July 25 to Tuesday, July 27
WEMF 2005 took place at the Orangeville Fairgrounds in Orangeville, Ontario from Friday July 8 to July 10.
WEMF 2006 took place at Trudeau Park in Tweed, Ontario from Friday July 21 to Sunday July 23.
WEMF 2007 took place at the Niagara Regional Exhibition (NRE) in Welland, Ontario from Friday July 20 to Sunday July 22.
WEMF 2008 took place at Madawaska, Ontario, from Friday, July 18 to Sunday, July 20.
WEMF 2011 took place at Madawaska, Ontario from Friday, August 12 to Sunday August 14.  The lineup was announced in stages, with the portion first portion of the headliners released on April 15, 2011, and the second portion released on May 13, 2011. Highlights included Rusko, Skrillex, Zeds Dead, Pendulum, Andy C, Noisia, Calvin Harris, Infected Mushroom, Caspa, and Mark Breeze. Tickets were on sale beginning Tuesday, February 15, 2011 at 11 A.M. EST via www.wemf.com and were offered at escalating prices over time ($25 Increase per 1000 tickets).  The talent lineup and budget was alleged to have been substantially increased for the 2011 festival to justify the substantially higher costs relative to previous years.
WEMF 2012 was announced December 17, 2011 and returned to Madawaska, Ontario, from Friday August 17 to Sunday August 19. Headline artists at WEMF 2012 included Wolfgang Gartner, Zeds Dead, Moby, Chase & Status, Pendulum, Andy C, Infected Mushroom (live), DJ Hype, Thomas Gold, Datsik, The Crystal Method, Krafty Kuts, Dub FX, Felix Cartel, 12th Planet, Christopher Lawrence, John 00 Fleming, Trolley Snatcha, Harvard Bass, Adventure Club, Ed Rush & Optical, MC GQ, Figure, The Killabits, Torro Torro, Adam K, Jelo Bad Company Keys & Krates Mimosa, Two Fresh, Jeft Tale and many, many more over 3 stages. The production was their most ambitious yet, with 2 massive main stages and a 3rd tented area. Renegade, or Community stages are purchasable prior to the event by contacting WEMF through their website: www.wemf.com. WEMF was produced by festival founder, Destiny with help from Toronto's EMbrace Presents and the EDM division of Live Nation, Electronic Nation.
WEMF 2013 was cancelled before the event was arranged.


== Past Headliners ==
WEMF 1996 - The first festival was held in association with the UK's Outer Limits. Headliners included Paul Edge, Platipus Records, Colin Favor, Brenda Russell.
WEMF 1998 featured 6 main stages of music

Destiny (trance): Jon The Dentist, Chris Liberator, M-Zone, Deniro, Mark EG, Christopher Lawrence, LL Bishop, Shane Morris, Matt Booker, Robert Oleysyk, Dave Trance, Mistress Barbara, The Alliance & Tweek (Live P.A.) + locals
Next Junction (drum'n'bass): Nicky Blackmarket, L Double, D.Bo General, R Notorious J, The Substitution Crew: DJ Lorne / DJ Starchild / DJ Kpakpa, MC Flex / MC Mis-ty, Athena Produce, Adaire, MC Blaise + locals
Hullabaloo (hardcore): Vinyltrixta, Spinback, Jimmy J + locals
Return To The Source (psy trance): Medicine Drum, Cosmosis, Ceiba + locals
Speed (techno): DJ Traxx, Dietrich, Altitude, Adam Marshall + locals
AM Trip: Dreamstate (Live P.A.) + localsWEMF 1999 featured 6 main stages of music:

Destiny (trance): Jon The Dentist, Chris Liberator, Mark EG, Mark Tyler, Shane Morris, Commander Tom, Andy Trex, Christopher Lawrence, Scott Stubbs, Dave Trance, Xotec, Flex, Max Graham, Vapourspace + locals
Dose (house + breaks): Dubtribe (Live), John Kelley, Daeman, Eric Davenport, Nigel Richards, Vitamin D, 3PO, Melting Man + locals
Hullabaloo (hardcore + trance): Vinyl Groover, Druid, M-Zone, Madam Zu, Mc Magika, Mc Stixman + locals
Syrous/Renegades (drum'n'bass): Mickey Finn, Ray Keith, Brockie, MC Det, MC GQ + locals
Moon Shadow Collective (psy trance): Psychopod, Frank E, Eon Ion, Tim Shuldt, Avatar + locals
Speed (techno): Andrew Weatherfall, Silicon Valley, Daz Quayle, Mike Shannon, Vortex, Algorhythm + localsWEMF 2000 featured 6 main stages of music:

Trance: Paul Oakenfold, Hardware, Mark EG, John '00' Flemming, Chris Liberator, Christopher Lawrence, Commander Tom, BK, Andy Farley, Marco Dux Baby, Scott Stubbs + locals
Drum'n'Bass: Darren Jay, Mickey Finn, Swift Skibadee, MC GQ + locals
Hardcore: Sy, M-Zone, Orange Peel + locals
House/Breaks: H Foundation, Problem Kids + locals
Techno: Thomas Krome, Disco D, Joel Mull + many more headliners
Psy Trance: Hallucinogen, Agent 1475 + localsWEMF 2001 featured 8 main stages of music:

Destiny trance stage: Nostrum, Commander Tom, Jon The Dentist, John '00' Flemming, Chris Liberator, Fergie, Andy Trex, Darren Pierce, Christopher Lawrence, Scott Stubbs, Benji Solice + locals
Dose house/breaks stage: Bassbin Twins, H Foundation, Olav Basoski, Czech, 3PO, Chris Anderson + locals
Syrous/Renegades drum'n'bass stage: Ed Rush, Optical, Ray Keith, Digital, Spirit, Dieselboy, Skibadee, MC MC, Rhyme Tyme, Rage + locals
Hullabaloo hardcore stage: Scott Brown, Breeze, Devastate, Storm, MC Whizzkid + locals
Eclipse psy-trance stage: Orion, Jean Borelli, Taka, Lori The HiFi Princess, Jamin + locals
Flux booty/hard house stage: DJ Funk, 420, Bam Bam, Alex Peace, Josh Da Funky 1, Rip, Paradigm, Frankie Vega, The Zelch Brothers, Major Malfunction, Xotec + locals
Techno stage: Punk Floyd, DDR, Christian Smith, Geezer, Murphy, Scorpion, Grooverobber + locals
Neksis chill tent: Czech, Rob Theakston, William Van Loo, Echo + moreWEMF 2002 featured 6 main stages of music:

Destiny trance stage: Christopher Lawrence, Graham Gold, Lange, Commander Tom, Chris Liberator, Yves Deruyter, Jon the Dentist, Lee Mullin of Hybrid, Pulser, Tim Lyall, Vinylgroover, Club Ra Tour featuring Scott Stubbs & Duane King + locals
Afternoon performances live on the main stage: The New Deal, Liquidfied, The Aponauts, Hibernate, Prine nebula, Rhythm Mercenaries, West Magnetic, The Lou Cypher Project
Syrous/Renegades drum'n'bass stage: Terry T, DJ Souljah, MC Fearless, Demolition Man, MC Dyer, Million Dollar Dan, Godfather JD, DJ Prophecy, Teebee, Shakka Zulu a.k.a. Golden Child + locals
Dose/Backbreakers house/breaks/techno stage: DJ Hyper, Simply Jeff, Czech, Chris Anderson, Grooverobber + locals
Hullabaloo hardcore stage: DJ Brisk, Kevin Energy, DJ Kaos, Simon Apex, MC Storm, MC Ethos + locals
Eclipse/CIA goa-trance stage: Shakta (Live PA), Mindfield (Live PA), Shape Shifter (Live PA), Digitalis, John Phantasm, Matt Boom, Ben Mindfield, Hugh Sharpe, Jamin, Steve-o + locals
Phlux urban beats stage: DJ Bam Bam, Alex Peace, DJ Assault, Josh "The Funky 1", DJ Rip, DJ Trajic, Jes One, Xotec + locals


== See also ==
List of electronic music festivals
List of music festivals in Canada


== References ==


== External links ==
World Electronic Music Festival
Destiny Productions