Buddies (play)

Air Buddies is a 2006 straight-to-DVD comedy film directed by Robert Vince. It is the sixth film in the Air Bud series and the first in the direct-to-video spin-off series Air Buddies, which follows the life of a lonely teenager and his dog who has the uncanny ability to play every sport.
The film changes the primary focus of the series from Buddy, an adult golden retriever, to his puppies.  It also radically alters the character of the series by making virtually all of the animals speak.
Air Buddies was released on December 12, 2006. It is Don Knotts and Patrick Cranshaw's final film, released after their deaths.


== Plot ==
Through a voiceover, Sniffer (voiced by Don Knotts) introduces the five Air Buddies, describes their personalities and recaps how the puppies' father, Air Bud, made the town of Fernfield famous through his love of sports. When their families leave home for a basketball game, the puppies get into trouble with their sitter, Mrs. Niggles, by playing with balls of wool and eating a blueberry pie. This prompts their owners to finally put the puppies up for adoption.
Meanwhile, Selkirk Tander (Holmes Osborne) tries to impress Mr. Livingston's  (Steve Makaj) son, Bartleby Livingston by showing him a female tiger for his birthday, but Bartleby wanted an animal he can play with. He wants Air Bud (Buddy) because Buddy can play sports. Mr. Livingston offers $500,000 if Selkirk can get Buddy. Selkirk then sends his nephew Grim and assistant Denning to capture Buddy.
At school, Noah and Henry collect every boy and girl's profile sheets and photos. After deciding which children who would make good owners, the family decides to call them the next day. Grim and Denning arrive at Buddy's home, only to see Buddy and Molly at the same time, thinking there are two air buds or they are mates. The next morning, the pups decide to run away. Grim and Denning follow them, and manage to catch Budderball by luring him with a doughnut. The other Buddies go and find Budderball; they are also captured and used as bait to catch Buddy and Molly. Buddy manages to free the Buddies but Denning traps him with a net. Molly attempts to save Buddy but gets herself captured. Denning and Grim put Buddy and Molly in the truck, while the buddies chase after them.
In wine country, Selkirk is pleased that Denning and Grim captured both Buddy and Molly so he can have them breed puppies and sell them for money. When Grim explains that Buddy and Molly already had puppies, which Denning let get away, Selkirk tells them to lock the dogs in the wine cellar and go and capture them. Selkirk also replaces Grim as the leader of the mission to capture the Buddies. Grim and Denning go back to Buddy's home to capture the Buddies but no luck. The Buddies have sniffed their way to the drive-in, where Grim and Denning are watching 101 Dalmatians. The Buddies find their way to the projection room and walk in front of the projector, their shadows attracting Denning and Grim's attention.
Grim and Denning catch up to the Buddies, chasing them to a farm. The Buddies meet Billy the goat and Belinda the pig, who help the Buddies escape from Grim and Denning. The Buddies lure Grim and Denning into a stable and escape through a small hole as Billy locks Grim and Denning in. The Buddies go through the forest then meet the Wolf who leads them to wine country. A skunk's spray enables Sniffer to smell again, so he calls Noah and Henry and they go off to find the Buddies. Buddy and Molly manage to escape to find the Buddies. Budderball falls into a hole, which Buddy and Molly dug, forcing the Buddies to help. Noah and Henry are led by Sniffer through the same farm that the Buddies went through. Noah and Henry are ecstatic and overjoyed at finding Grim and Denning being held prisoners by Billy the goat, and immediately leave to report them and turn them in to authorities over Grim and Denning's protests. Bartleby and his father come to collect the dogs but instead finds the Buddies. Bartleby and his father then put the Buddies in a limousine, when Noah, Henry, Buddy and Molly come to rescue the Buddies. Budderball falls into one of the wine containers and gets drunk. Bartleby catches Budderball but is caught by Sniffer. 
Noah, Henry, and the dogs release barrels towards Selkirk and Mr. Livingston; the barrels break the wine container. Selkirk and Mr. Livingston fall in, as the container cracks open. Washing out of the container, Sheriff Bob arrives to arrest Selkirk, Denning, and Grim. The Buddies apologize to Buddy and Molly; they understand and say they're ready for their new owners. Budderball decides to stay with Bartleby because he needs a friend. The puppies are introduced to their new families and end up enjoying their new lives. The film ends with Buddy, Molly, Buddha, Budderball, Rosebud, B-Dawg, Mudbud, Sniffer and The Wolf howling to show how they are still family, despite their distance.


== Cast ==


=== Live-action actors ===
Slade Pearce - Noah Sullivan, the son of Jackie and Patrick and the half brother of Josh and Andrea Framm.
Holmes Osborne - Selkirk Tander, the villain of the movie.
Trevor Wright - Grim, Selkirk's foolish nephew.
Paul Rae - Denning
Christian Pikes - Henry
Patrick Cranshaw - Sheriff Bob
Tyler Guerrero - Bartleby Livingston
Steven Makaj - Mr. Miles Livingston
Richard Karn - Dr. Patrick Sullivan, a local veterinarian, the father of Noah, the husband of Jackie, and the step father of Josh and Andrea. Patrick marries Jackie in Air Bud: Golden Receiver.
Cynthia Stevenson - Jackie Framm Sullivan, the mother of Josh, Andrea, and Noah and the wife of Patrick. Prior to the events of the "Air Buddies" series her first husband was killed in a plane crash.
Jane Carr - Mrs. Niggles
Scout and Parker - Air Bud (because of the demanding schedule, the role was played by more than one dog)


=== Voice actors (alphabetical order) ===
Abigail Breslin - Rosebud  - the lone girl and only sister of the Buddies. She always wears a pink bow in her fur (usually her head) to separate herself from her brothers. She is  protective of her brothers and her favorite color is pink.
Dominic Scott Kay - Buddha - the peaceful Buddhist of the Buddies. He loves to meditate and wears a Buddhist collar made of beads. He is named after a virtuous person, Gautama Buddha.
Josh Flitter - Budderball - The chubbiest of the Buddies. He enjoys food and wears black ink on his face to look like a football player. In addition to this he also sports a red football shirt. When his paw is pulled, he farts, an allusion to Pull my finger.
Spencer Fox - Mudbud - The dirt-loving dude of the Buddies. He wears a blue handkerchief around his neck.
Skyler Gisondo - B-Dawg - The rapping pup of the Buddies. He loves hip hop and wears a platinum chain with a 'B' as a pendant around his neck to look cool.
Tom Everett Scott - Buddy - The father of the Buddies. He's still as fun-loving and athletic as he was before the Buddies were born. He belongs to Noah. After the events of the previous "Air Bud" movies his former owners Josh and Andrea have grown up and moved out. This is the first time Buddy actually speaks.
Molly Shannon - Molly - The mother of the Buddies. She loves her children and Buddy very much and will do anything to protect them. She belongs to Henry.
Michael Clarke Duncan - The Wolf - The Wolf is a friendly inhabitant of the forest who helps the Buddies get to wine country.
Don Knotts - Sniffer - An old Bloodhound who lost his sense of smell years ago. He later regains it after getting sprayed by a skunk. He is one of the characters in the movie who help the Buddies find their parents.
Wallace Shawn - Billy - a goat who the Buddies meet on the farm. He helps keep the Buddies out of Grim and Denning's clutches.
Debra Jo Rupp - Belinda - a kind sow who the Buddies meet on the farm and speaks Pig Latin.B-Dawg is the pup who can play basketball, while Budderball plays football, Rosebud plays soccer, Buddha plays baseball, and Mudbud plays volleyball.
All the animals can speak in this film. This was the first time speaking animals have appeared in the Air Bud series.


== Release ==
The movie was released directly to DVD on December 12, 2006 by Walt Disney Home Entertainment.
Mill Creek Entertainment will reissue the movie on January 14, 2020 on a 2-disc boxset also containing the other Air Bud movies owned by Air Bud Entertainment.


== External links ==
The Official Disney Air Buddies Website
Air Buddies on IMDb
Air Buddies at Rotten Tomatoes
Air Buddies DVD Review