MacArthur High School (Levittown, New York)

MacArthur High School is a secondary school located in Levittown, New York. One of two high schools in the Levittown Union Free School District, the high school is named after United States General Douglas MacArthur.
As of the 2014-15 school year, the school had an enrollment of 1,314 students and 98.5 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 13.3:1. There were 147 students (11.2% of enrollment) eligible for free lunch and 62 (4.7% of students) eligible for reduced-cost lunch.According to the 2007 Newsweek Magazine issue of Top 1,200 U.S. schools, MacArthur High School is currently ranked as #518.


== Renaissance Program ==
Adapted through a unanimous vote of the school's faculty in the spring of 1994, the Renaissance Program rewards students who excel in academics. Students who pass everything, including midterms, finals, and regents, are hosted at a semi-annual breakfast. Students receive cards in either platinum, gold, blue, or gray, depending upon their grade average or status as an Honor Society member. These cards entitle the students to various "special perks and privileges," including discounts on tickets to school plays and dances. The four-year Renaissance card-holders of every senior class are hosted at an additional special brunch.


== Music and theater ==
MacArthur's Music program includes symphonic band (which includes marching band), orchestra, four levels of guitar class, electronic music, music theory and advanced placement music theory, various choruses, jazz ensemble, music of the 20th century, and multiple levels of piano classes.
The marching band (accompanied by kickline and color guard) participates at football games, parades, and the annual Newsday Festival at Hofstra University. They are known as the MacArthur Symphonic Band.
The guitar program hosts an annual "Guitar Shredding" competition in which five star students of the year's class perform a freestyle and improvise solos over backing tracks to win prize and acclaim among their peers.
The musical theater program offers theater classes and produces seasonal plays and musicals.


== Sports ==
MacArthur has over 25 varsity and junior varsity level athletic teams.  They include badminton, baseball, basketball (boys and girls) bowling, football, lacrosse (boys and girls), soccer (boys and girls), softball, tennis, track and field, volleyball, and wrestling.
The MacArthur High School varsity baseball team was crowned New York State champions in 1994.
The varsity football team has captured 2 Nassau County championships. The first came in 2002 and the second in 2015.


== Notable alumni ==
David Catapano, Celebrity Chef
David Falk, Sports agent
Bill Griffith is a cartoonist in the United States. He is known for his comic strip Zippy the Pinhead.
Steve Israel, Congressman
Jesse Lacey, lead singer of award-winning alternative rock band Brand New as well as founding member of band Taking Back Sunday
Olivia Mellan, Salutatorian, Class of 1964, is a leading money conflict resolution coach and author of 6 books on money psychology.
Candace Pert, aka Candace Beebe Pert, Class of 1964, was a neuroscientist who discovered the opiate receptor, the cellular bonding site for endorphins in the brain.
Gian Villante, 2003 New York State Champion wrestler and Thorpe Award Winner (Nassau County's Best Football Player); professional Mixed Martial Artist in the Ultimate Fighting Championship. MMA fighter/football player


== References ==


== External links ==
MacArthur High School Website
Varsity Football Photos from the Nassau County Semifinals on 11-10-06
Alumni Listing