Turquoise (Dr. Stone)

This is a list of characters for the manga and anime series Dr. Stone.


== Main characters ==
Senku Ishigami (石神 千空, Ishigami Senkū)
Voiced by: Yūsuke Kobayashi (Japanese); Aaron Dismuke, Mikaela Krantz (child) (English)
Senku is highly intelligent genius who excels in multiple fields of science, with a special love of astronomy and space exploration. After awakening in the "Stone World", he sets to restore civilization by reinventing their lost technology and discovering a "cure" for the petrification. Though somewhat arrogant, he is actually very noble and kind-hearted as he considers science as a means to elevate all people and having unshakeable faith in his friends. After faking his death to keep Tsukasa from hunting him, Senku befriends the residents of Ishigami Village and becomes their chef.Taiju Oki (大木 大樹, Ōki Taiju)
Voiced by: Makoto Furukawa (Japanese); Ricco Fajardo, Emily Fajardo (child) (English)
Senku's best friend, whom Senku refers to as a "big oaf" or "musclehead". He has incredible strength and seemingly limitless stamina, but is a pacifist who's never thrown a punch in his life. He is in love with Yuzuriha and will do anything to take care of her, especially when she's in danger. After Senku fakes his death to keep Tsukasa from hunting them, Taiju and Yuzuriha infiltrate the Empire of Might to keep tabs on Tsukasa before rejoining Senku in Ishigami Village.Yuzuriha Ogawa (小川 杠, Ogawa Yuzuriha)
Voiced by: Kana Ichinose (Japanese); Brittany Lauda (English)
Taiju's love interest, a cheerful and kindhearted young woman. She enrolled in her high school's handicraft's club to pursue her goal of becoming a fashion designer, and is exceptionally talented at arts like stitching and clothwork. During the Vs. Tsukasa arc, Yuzuriha is taken captive by Tsukasa. Senku has her and Taiju join the Empire of Might as part of his plan. During the Age of Exploration arc, Yuzuriha starts a clothing store.Tsukasa Shishio (獅子王 司, Shishiō Tsukasa)
Voiced by: Yuichi Nakamura (Japanese); Ian Sinclair (English)
A youth who rose to fame in mixed martial arts as "The Strongest Primate High Schooler", being physically powerful enough to kill a lion with one punch. He wears a red ghi and is always barefoot. After being reawakened by Senku to save him and Taiju from a lion pack, Tsukasa wears the pelt of the male lion he killed while hunting for Senku and Taiju. He resents adults due to his experience with one who prevented him from gathering seashells for his sister before she died, viewing the current adults as an avaricious corruption while seeking to create a new society in the "Stone World" by only reviving young people. Tsukasa serves as the primary antagonist of the manga's early story arcs, appearing to have kill Senku when he refuses to back down from restoring their civilization before proceeding to establish his Empire of Might. Through he revived Gen to confirm Senku's death, Tsukasa remained in the dark of his opposition's survival until learning it from Hyoga. During the Communications arc, Tsukasa forced to ally himself with Senku after Hyoga betrayed him. After Hyoga is defeated, the critical injuries Tsukasa suffered from the fight force him to be placed in cryosleep with his remaining forces absorbed into the Kingdom of Science.Gen Asagiri (あさぎり ゲン, Asagiri Gen)
Voiced by: Kengo Kawanishi (Japanese); Brandon McInnis (English)
Another person from the "old world", Gen is a silver-tongued self-help guru who styles himself as a mentalist. Gen wears an overcoat over his yakuta and is always barefoot. He was revived by Tsukasa who wanted an ally who can think like Senku and confirm his death. But being self-serving, Gen ends up defecting to the Kingdom of Science after witnessing Senku's accomplishments.Chrome (クロム, Kuromu)
Voiced by: Gen Sato (Japanese); Matt Shipman (English)
A youth from Ishigami Village who named himself the village's self-proclaimed sorcerer when stumbled upon the basics of science and mistook them as sorcery, wanting to save Ruri. Chrome later learns about the scientific wonders of the old world and become Senku's partner as he helps him rediscover humanity's scientific legacy.Kohaku (コハク)
Voiced by: Manami Numakura (Japanese); Felecia Angelle (English)
The strongest warrior of Ishigami Village and Ruri's younger sister, a tomboyish young woman who is exceptionally strong, agile, and sharp-eyed. She is the first villager Senku meets after awakening in the "Stone World" and becomes one of his staunchest allies as part of the Kingdom of Science's Power Team.Suika (スイカ)
Voiced by: Karin Takahashi (Japanese); Sarah Wiedenheft (English)
A young girl from Ishigami Village who wears a melon on her head to cover up her "fuzzy sickness". She ends up gravitating to Senku, helping him as he is the first person not to judge her for her eccentricities before he outfitted her melon helmet with customized lenses. Suika often helps Senku out by being a scout for different missions.


== Kingdom of Science and Empire of Might ==
When Tsukasa was revived and had some differences with Senku, two factions rose. The Kingdom of Science (科学王国, Kagaku Ōkoku) was made by Senku in order to recreate the scientific achievements in the world. The Tsukasa Empire (司帝国, Tsukasa Teikoku) was made so that the strong can rule. When Hyoga was defeated and Tsukasa entered cryosleep, the remnants of the Empire of Might merged with the Kingdom of Science which later gained new members from those who were freed from their petrification.

Hyoga (氷月, Hyōga)
Voiced by: Akira Ishida
Hyoga is a tall and fairly-built man who is strong enough to take on 10 attackers. He is revived by Tsukasa during the Vs. Hyoga arc. He and some Empire of Might fighters took on the Ishigami Village's finest until it was discovered that Gen rigged their weapons. During the Communications arc, he betrays Tsukasa causing an unlikely team-up between Senku and Tsukasa to defeat him. During the Age of Exploration arc, Hyoga had to accompany Senku who needed some additional muscle.Homura Momiji (紅葉 ほむら, Momiji Homura)
Voiced by: Aki Toyosaki
Homura is a member of Tsukasa's Empire of Might who was a gymnast prior to the petrification and is the right-hand to Hyoga. Homura was released from her petrification and has an allegiance to Hyoga. During the Communications arc sometime after Hyoga's defeat, she did do some surveillance on Ishigami Village. When Homura tried to sabotage the radio tower, Magma and Kinro cut the tree enabling Kohaku to catch her. During the Age of Exploration arc, Homura had to accompany Senku who needed some additional muscle.Minami Hokutozai (北東西 南, Hokutōzai Minami)
Minami was a buxom journalist prior to petrification who has a knowledge of famous people. After being released from her petrification, Minami serves Tsukasa where she wears a leather dress and is always barefoot. Both of them agree that the world before the petrification was awful. When Hyoga was defeated and Tsukasa entered cryosleep, Minami is among those that join the Kingdom of Science where she joins their Information Team. During the Age of Exploration arc, Minami and Gen barter for the stone formula so that they can reawaken Francois in order to recreate the camera.Ukyo Saionji (西園寺 羽京, Saionji Ukyō)
Ukyo Saionji is an SDF Navy soldier and submarine sonar operator who was released from petrification by Tsukasa. He is an expert at different languages and has super-sensitive hearing. When he works with Tsukasa, Ukyo became an expert archer and one of Tsukasa's scouts. During the Communcations arc, Ukyo attacked Chrome, Gen, and Magma when they were setting up telephone poles which ended with him capturing Chrome. Following Hyoga's defea and Tsukasa entering cryosleep, Ukyo is among those that join the Kingdom of Science where he becomes one of the Five Wise Generals.Ryusui Nanami (七海 龍水, Nanami Ryūsui)
The son of Nanami Conglomerate's owner who was revived by Senku in the Age of Exploration arc to be part of the Kingdom of Science. As an expert sailor, he was made the Captain of the Perseus which he helped build.Francois (フランソワ, Furansowa)
Francois is the butler and chef of Ryusui who is unsure what gender Francois is. During the "Age of Exploration" arc, s/he was revived by Senku and Ryusui to work for them.


== Ishigami Village inhabitants ==
The inhabitants of Ishigami Village (石神村, Ishigami Mura) are descended from the surviving astronauts of the International Space Station that were off-world at the time when the petrification light caused all humans to be petrified. It became the headquarters of the Kingdom of Science. A village chief is chosen from whoever makes it to the final part of the Ishigami Village games and wins. When a person becomes the village chief, that person is entitled to a lot of resources from Ishigami Village. Besides Chrome, Kohaku, and Suika, the following are the inhabitants of Ishigami Village:

Kinro (金狼, Kinrō)
Voiced by: Tomoaki Maeno (Japanese); Josh Grelle (English)
One of Ishigami Village's guardsmen, a stern young man with a strong commitment to the rules who eventually joined Senku's group as part of the Power Team. Like Suika, he suffers from "fuzzy sickness" with Ginro his confidant before Suika realized it during the Ishigami games and Senku later providing him glasses in the aftermath.Ginro (銀狼, Ginrō)
Voiced by: Ayumu Murase (Japanese); Justin Briner (English)
Kinro's younger brother and fellow guardsman, a frivolous young man with a tendency to panic and an overriding sense of self-interest. He becomes part of the Power Team.Ruri (ルリ)
Voiced by: Reina Ueda (Japanese); Kristen McGuire (English)
Kohaku's older sister and Ishigami Village's high priestess, tasked with preserving the Hundred Stories (百物語, Hyaku Monogatari) for posterity. She suffers from a debilitating illness that will likely kill her before adulthood and finding a cure becomes the first goal of Senku's "Kingdom of Science."Kaseki (カセキ)
Voiced by: Mugihito (Japanese); Kenny Green (English)
An old but ripped artisan from Ishigami Village, he becomes a staunch ally and eventually a close friend of Senku and Chrome's because their quest for science resonates with his passion for crafting. While having designed and built much of Ishigami Village, Kaseki used his artisan abilities to create Kohaku's shield and items from Senku's diagrams with little practice like glass, engines, and vacuum tubes.Turquoise (ターコイズ, Tākoizu)
Voiced by: Yō Taichi (Japanese); Mallorie Rodak (English)
An inhabitant of Ishigami Village.Magma (マグマ, Maguma)
Voiced by: Yasuhiro Mamiya (Japanese); J. Michael Tatum (English)
An inhabitant of Ishigami Village who is the strongest of its inhabitants and helps to defend it from attacks, having intended to take over the village before accepting Senku as their leader. He takes a liking to Taiju due to his unlimited stamina as seen when Magma watched him tend to the fields where he didn't tire out. At one point, Magma mistook Gen as a sorcerer.Mantle (マントル, Mantoru)
Voiced by: Shin Matsushige (Japanese); J. Michael Tatum (English)
A very short inhabitant of Ishigami Village who idolizes Magma and does his dirty work.Kokuyo (コクヨウ, Kokuyou)
Voiced by: Tetsuo Kanao (Japanese); Jason Douglas (English)
A large inhabitant of Ishigami Village who is the father of Kohaku and Ruri. He was the village chief of Ishigami Village at the time of Senku's reawakening.Soyuz (ソユーズ, Soyūzu)
A bald-headed inhabitant of Ishigami Village with great memory and a member of the Power Team. He is often shown shirtless, has an X-scar on top of his head and is always barefoot. As a baby, Soyuz was originally from an island that Senku named "Treasure Island" before he was cast off.Jasper (ジャスパー, Jasupā)
Voiced by: Ryota Takeuchi (Japanese); Patric Carroll (English)
An inhabitant of Ishigami Village who is a stickler for rules. During the Village Games arc, Jasper served as a match judge.Ganen (ガンエン, Ganen)
Voiced by: Muro Genki (Japanese); Travis Mullenix (English)
A fat inhabitant of Ishigami Village who is the residential glutton. He was starting to get tired of fish every day until Senku managed to recreate ramen.Alabaster (アラバスタ, Arabasuta)
An inhabitant of Ishigami Village.Dia (ダイア, Daia)
An inhabitant of Ishigami Village and the wife of Alabaster.Ruby (ルビィ, Rubi)
Voiced by: Reina Kondō (Japanese); Marcy Ann Johnson (English)
An inhabitant of Ishigami Village with black hair who is the daughter of Alabaster and Dia and the sister of Garnet and Sapphire. She and her sisters are described by Kohaku to be the most prettiest girls in Ishigami Village.Garnet (ガーネット, Gānetto)
Voiced by: Shizuka Ishigami (Japanese); Margaret McDonald (English)
An inhabitant of Ishigami Village with long blonde hair who is the daughter of Alabaster and Dia and the sister of Ruby and Sapphire.Sapphire (サファイア, Safaia)
Voiced by: Kaori Maeda (Japanese); Rachel Michelle Thompson (English)
An inhabitant of Ishigami Village with shoulder-length blonde hair who is the daughter of Alabaster and Dia and the sister of Ruby and Garnet.Namari (ナマリ)
A short inhabitant of Ishigami Village who is a residential artist.


== International Space Station crew ==
Byakuya Ishigami (石神 百夜, Ishigami Byakuya)
Voiced by: Keiji Fujiwara (Japanese); Kent Williams (English)
Byakuya is the adoptive father of Senku, a former teacher, and one of the astronauts on the International Space Station at the time when the people of Earth were petrified. When he and his fellow astronauts returned to Earth and found what happened, Byakuya led them into establishing Ishigami Village. Later he marries Lillian Weinberg. In addition, Byakuya gathered the rare metals that can be used by Senku when he finally becomes unpetrified. By the time Senku was unpetrified, Byakuya was long dead. In the "Village Origins" arc, Senku found a time capsule disk that Byakuya left him after learning from the Hundred Stories.Lillian Weinberg (リリアン・ワインバーグ, Ririan Wainbāgu)
Voiced by: Lynn (Japanese); Caitlin Glass (English); Laura Pitt-Pulford (singing voice) (Both languages)
Lillian Weinberg is an American songstress who was one of the astronauts on the International Space Station at the time when the people of Earth were petrified. Years later she and Byakuya got married and both had children. They are the ancestors of people from Ishigami Village.Connie Lee (コニー・リー, Konī Rī)
Voiced by: Hisako Kanemoto (Japanese); Erica Mendez (English)
Connie Lee is a NASA personnel who was one of the astronauts on the International Space Station at the time when the people of Earth were petrified.Shamil Volkov (シャミール・ヴォルコフ, Shamīru Vuorukofu)
Voiced by: Showtaro Morikubo (Japanese); Patrick Seitz (English)
Shamil Volkov is a Russian cosmonaut, a former pilot, and husband of Connie Lee who was one of the astronauts on the International Space Station at the time when the people of Earth were petrified. He helped to establish Ishigami Village.Darya Nikitina (ダリヤ・ニキーチナ, Dariya Nikīchina)
Voiced by: Rie Tanaka (Japanese); Rachel Robinson (English)
Darya Nikitina is a Russian cosmonaut and doctor who was one of the astronauts on the International Space Station at the time when the people of Earth were petrified.Yakov Nikitin (ヤコフ・ニキーチン, Yakofu Nikīchin)
Voiced by: Kanehira Yamamoto (Japanese); Mike Pollock (English)
Yakov Nikitin is a Russian cosmonaut, doctor, and husband of Darya Nikitina who was one of the astronauts on the International Space Station at the time when the people of Earth were petrified.


== References ==