MV Kanangra

The MV Kanangra (formerly SS Kanangra) is a ferry formerly operated by Sydney Ferries Limited and its successors on Sydney Harbour from 1912 until 1985. It is the last remaining "K-class" ferries built by Sydney Ferries Limited in the early twentieth century pre-Sydney Harbour Bridge peak. 45 metres in length, Kanangra could carry over 1,000 passengers and mainly served the Cremorne and Mosman routes.
It is now part of the Sydney Heritage Fleet and is moored at Rozelle Bay undergoing restoration.


== History ==
Unlike the previous K-class ferries that were timber-hulled, the Kanangra and her near identical twin sister, Kirawa were riveted steel hull vessels with timber decks and superstructures. Built by Mort's Dock, Woolwich for Sydney Ferries Limited, Kanangra was  launched on 14 August 1912.In 1959, it was converted from steam to diesel power with a single direct coupled eight cylinder Crossley engine driving a fore and aft propellor, the last of the Sydney Harbour fleet converted. The ferry's re-entry to service allowed the last of the coal-fired steamers, Kubu, to be retired. Her near identical sister ship, Kirawa, was retired in 1953 without being converted to diesel.As one of the largest ferries in the fleet, it primarily operated on the most heavily patronised services, initially the Circular Quay to Milsons Point services until the Harbour Bridge opened in 1932, and then on the worker's services to Cockatoo Island and later Mosman and Taronga Zoo services.In June 1964, the Kanangra collided with the Japanese freighter Awata Maru off Kirribilli. In November 1984, it collided with the North Head off the Opera House.One of the longest serving ferries on Sydney Harbour, Kanangra was withdrawn from service in 1985 and moored adjacent to the Pyrmont Bridge in Darling Harbour. After plans to restore it as a Bicentennial project were dropped, it was donated to the Sydney Heritage Fleet in 1987. It is currently moored in Rozelle Bay. It has been placed on the Australian Register of Historic Vessels.


== See also ==
List of Sydney Harbour ferries


== References ==