UCTV (University of California)

University of California Television (known simply as UCTV) is a 24-hour television channel presenting educational and enrichment programming from the campuses, national laboratories, and affiliated institutions of the University of California system. UCTV's non-commercial programming delivers science, health and medicine, public affairs, humanities, and the arts to a general audience, as well as specialized programming for health care professionals and teachers. Programming includes documentaries, lectures, debates, interviews, performances and more.
UCTV is an Educational-access television cable TV channel. See "Where to watch" below. UCTV can also be seen worldwide via live webstream, video-on-demand archives (Flash files), and offers both audio and video podcasts for downloading. UCTV programs are also available on YouTube, Apple podcast, Roku and Amazon Fire. UCTV was available nationwide on Dish Network (channel 9412) (service terminated by Dish as of March 1, 2012).
UCTV launched in January 2000 on the Dish Network and is based on the UC San Diego campus where UCSD-TV is also located. UCTV collects programming from each of the ten University of California campuses (UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UC Los Angeles, UC Merced, UC Riverside, UC San Diego, UC San Francisco, UC Santa Barbara, UC Santa Cruz) and affiliated institutions (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Los Alamos National Laboratory, UC Agriculture & Natural Resources, UC Office of the President, UC Sacramento Center, UC Washington DC Center).


== Thematic programming ==
UCTV airs 25 hours of original programming per week on a rotating 24-hour schedule of three-hour thematic blocks in the areas of science, health and medicine, public affairs, humanities, and arts and music
UCTV offers a one-hour program block for health care professionals called The Med Ed Hour (Tuesday through Thursday at noon Pacific), featuring medical programs for physicians, nurses and other health care professionals.


== UCTV series ==
UCTV series include:

Brain Channel: Explore the world of neuroscience and the secrets of the brain.
Career Channel: Information and tools to help college graduates with their careers.
Computer Science Channel: All that is new in the world of computer science from UC San Diego Computer Science and Engineering.
Library Channel: Interviews, author talks, mini-documentaries and other programs that will inspire you to Read, Write, Think and Dream.
Public Policy Channel: Policy makers, policy critics, and innovative policy thinkers.
STEAM Channel: The value of adding Arts to STEM Education.
Sustainable California: Real-world solutions for all Californians.
Wellbeing Channel:  Integrative and whole-systems healthcare.
Burke Lectureship on Religion and Society : Scholars and theologians explore religion in modern society.
CARTA - Center for Academic Research and Training in Anthropogeny: Exploring and explaining the origins of the human phenomenon.
Conversations with History: Interviews and discussion of political, economic, military, legal, cultural, and social issues from UC Berkeley's Institute of International Studies.
Ethics, Religion and Public Life: Walter H. Capps Center Series: Presentations on ethics, religion and public life.
Exploring Ethics: Experts discuss ethical implications of new science and technology.
Field Trip at the Lab: Science on Saturday: Science lectures for middle and high school students.
GRIT Talks: Innovative research at UCSB.
Health Matters: Current and valuable information to improve your health.
Helen Edison Lecture Series: Lectures that advance humanitarian purposes and objectives.
Herman P. and Sophia Taubman Endowed Symposia in Jewish Studies: Prominent figures share their work related to the Jewish experience.
Innovator Stories: Creating Something from Nothing: Candid conversations with distinguished industry leaders.
Perspectives on Ocean Science Lecture Series: Engaging marine science lectures from Birch Aquarium at Scripps.
Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind: Bridging disciplinary boundaries to further our understanding of the origins, evolution and mechanisms of human cognition.
La Jolla Symphony & Chorus: Presenting ground-breaking, traditional and contemporary music.
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory: Cutting-edge research explained in everyday language.
Mini Medical School for the Public: Learn about health and the health sciences directly from the experts.
Osher UC San Diego Distinguished Lecture Series: Prestigious guest speakers on newsworthy topics.
Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies: Searching for solutions to challenging health policy problems.
Qualcomm Thinkabit Lab Presents: Hands-on lessons in engineering, careers, and more.
Saturday Science at The Scripps Research Institute: Cutting-edge research occurring at The Scripps Research Institute.
Science at the Theater: Explore cutting-edge science with leading scientists.
Script to Screen: Screenwriting and how the screenplay is translated into film.
Soundscape: Musical performances from UCSB.
UC Berkeley Graduate Lectures: Distinguished visitors to Berkeley speak on a wide range of topics.
UC Davis Graduate School of Management's Dean's Distinguished Speaker Series: Business leaders share their wisdom, insights and experience.
UC San Diego Jazz Camp: Annual program for intermediate to advanced level musicians.
UCLA Faculty Research Lectures: Special lectures given by distinguished UCLA scholars.
UCSF Center for Obesity Assessment, Study and Treatment: A look at the factors that contribute to obesity.
UCSF Transplant Update: Treatment of transplant patients for health care professionals.
Voices: UCSB faculty and guests talk about issues and their impact.
Writer's Symposium By The Sea: Conversations with best-selling authors.


== See also ==
UCSD-TV


== External links ==
UCTV
Message about Dish dropping UCTV and other viewing options
UCSD-TV Creators Had Big Dreams For Small Screen
UCTV Launching Science-Heavy YouTube Channel
UC's Ivory Tower Beaming Out a New Television Signal
UC San Diego Department and UCTV Launch ‘The Computer Science Channel’
‘The Brain Channel’ Program on UCTV Features Hearing Researchers
Neanderthal genome research featured in UCTV report
UCTV Documentary Features UCSF in "A Dose of Hope" for Parkinson's Patients
'Science on Saturday' gains a following on UCTV
Honoring Sally on UCTV
Jiyo, The Chopra Center for Wellbeing, and the University of California San Diego School of Medicine Launch New UC Wellbeing Channel on UCTV