Dushman (1998 film)

Dushman (translation: Enemy) is a 1998 Bollywood Psychological thriller film starring Sanjay Dutt, Kajol and Ashutosh Rana in lead roles. The film is directed by Tanuja Chandra and produced by Mukesh Bhatt and Pooja Bhatt. The film was well received by critics as well as at the box office and was the seventh highest grossing Hindi film of 1998, winning lead actress Kajol, who was seen in the double role of twin sisters along with Ashutosh Rana, quite a few awards at a number of  award ceremonies that year.
The film is a remake of Hollywood film Eye for an Eye.


== Plot ==
Sonia Sehgal and Naina Sehgal (both played by Kajol) are twins. The two are completely different from each other, Sonia being the outgoing twin and Naina being the shy one. Meanwhile, the police are hunting for a cold-blooded, sadistic killer and rapist, Gokul Pandit (Ashutosh Rana). However, tragedy strikes when Gokul rapes and brutally kills Sonia. After Police investigation, Gokul is caught but is declared innocent as Sunanda, one of the main witnesses and Gokul's fiancé gives a false statement in court. Naina is distraught and vows to hunt down Gokul. Gokul soon goes after Naina and she realizes she needs help to overcome her fear of Gokul. With revenge in her mind, she meets Suraj Singh Rathod (Sanjay Dutt), a blind military veteran and he helps her physically and mentally to defeat her fear of Gokul. While Suraj trains Naina they develop feelings for each other. After an argument, Suraj refuses to meet Naina and she decides to go after Gokul all by herself. One day Gokul kidnaps Naina's younger sister Dia from school in order to scare and warn Naina with what risk she is playing. That day Naina's mother decides to leave for Naintal immediately as her daughter's life is at risk. However, Naina cannot control her hatred and wanted to avenge her sister at any cost. Naina lays a trap for Gokul and tries to kill him but Gokul ties her up and tries to rape her like her sister. Suraj arrives at her house and fights Gokul but ends up being stabbed. Naina gets free and manages to fatally shoot Gokul.
Suraj recovers from his injuries and decides to go away from Naina, but she realizes that she loves him and cannot live without Suraj. The film ends on a good note as Suraj and Naina get together and move on with their lives.


== Cast ==
Sanjay Dutt as Major Suraj Singh Rathod
Kajol as  Naina Sehgal  / Sonia Sehgal, identical  twins  (partially dubbed by Mona Ghosh Shetty)
Ashutosh Rana as Gokul Pandit
Jas Arora as Kabir Suraj
Tanvi Azmi as Mrs. Poornima Sehgal
Pramod Muthu as ACP Santosh Singh Sehgal
Kunal Khemu as Bheem
Pratima Kazmi as prosecuting Attorney
Anupam Shyam as Inspector Dubey
Vani Tripathi as Sunanda Tripathi
Amardeep Jha as Jaya
Rahul Singh as taxi driver


== Soundtrack ==
The music for the film was composed by Uttam Singh and Anand Bakshi penned the lyrics.


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Dushman on IMDb