Dustin Brooks (Zoey 101)

This is a list of characters from the Nickelodeon comedy-drama Zoey 101, an American television series which originally aired on Nickelodeon from January 9, 2005 until May 2, 2008.


== Main characters ==


=== Zoey Brooks ===
Zoey Brooks (Jamie Lynn Spears) is the main character in the series. Zoey is the older sister of Dustin Brooks and the roommate and best friend of Dana Cruz (Season 1), Nicole Bristow (Season 1-2), Lola Martinez (Season 2-4), and Quinn Pensky (Season 1-4); she is also the best friend of Chase Matthews. Her other best friends are Michael Barrett, Logan Reese and James Garrett. Zoey enjoys basketball and is one of the first girls on the PCA Basketball Team; she also enjoys designing clothes and backpacks. Zoey is quite good at playing disc golf and she is a good actress and won the role of a female alien in the school play alongside, Logan Reese. Zoey owns a pink Jet-X scooter and enjoys eating at PCA's restaurant Sushi Rox. Zoey runs for class president, but drops out due to her friendship with Chase. Zoey has two enemies – Rebecca and Stacy – but mostly she is friends with everyone at PCA and has two boyfriends during the series. She briefly dates the dean's son and then dates James Garrett. Zoey sticks up for her friends and her little brother and proves herself as a true friend.
Zoey is a natural leader whose spunk, charming and independent nature help her rally support for anything she does. In the third Zoey 101 movie, "Goodbye Zoey?," she moves to London to go to a preparatory school called Covington while her dad works in England. She returns to PCA to tell Chase her true feelings after overhearing him tell Michael and Logan that he misses and loves her, but Chase has already transferred to Covington to be with Zoey. They try to date via webcam, but decide that it would not work out and that they would have to wait until Chase returns to PCA after one full semester.
While Chase is in London, Zoey dates James Garrett, and, before prom, he tells her that he loves her. Zoey, unsure of her feelings, decides to break up with him, though they decide to remain friends. After a long wait, Chase and Zoey share their awaited first kiss and officially become a couple in the series finale "Chasing Zoey."


=== Dustin Brooks ===
Dustin Brooks (Paul Butcher) is Zoey's younger brother. Besides being his fiercest protector and closest confidante, Zoey becomes her brother's classmate at the newly co-ed PCA. A child prodigy, Dustin enjoys sharing an 8th grade geometry class with his equally savvy elder sister. He also helps Quinn Pensky with her scientific experiments, when he is not talking his way in and out of assorted sticky situations.
Whenever Dustin gets in over his head, Zoey is always the first one to rush to her brother's aid. Although her protective behavior gets on Dustin's nerves from time to time, he loves Zoey too much to hold that against her. He dates a girl named Trisha Kirby in the season 2 episode "Bad Girl". By Season 3, not only is Dustin friends with all of the main characters, but he also spends much time with children closer to his own age. When Zoey moves with their parents to London, Dustin stays at PCA. In the TV movie "Chasing Zoey", he goes to the prom with Quinn, but storms out when he thinks he is being used and is not seen afterward; but in the alternative ending, Quinn apologizes to Dustin and he later dances with an unknown girl.


=== Chase Matthews ===
Chase Matthews (Sean Flynn) is the main male character in Zoey 101, and the first person that Zoey meets at PCA. In several episodes, people make fun of Chase's bushy hair, which is referred to by Michael as a "crazy Jewish afro" in the episode "The Dance Contest." Chase is a dork, but girls enjoy hanging out with him. He is from Baltimore. Chase has a "secret" crush on Zoey that he is afraid to tell her. He has been known to be very clumsy, usually falling down stairs. It was revealed in the episode "Favor Chain," that Chase has an encyclopedic knowledge of all things having to do with comic books. Chase has a dog named Chester, mentioned only once in the episode "Lola Likes Chase."
Chase is very gullible, as seen in "New Roomies," where, to win a game of foosball, Zoey makes Chase believe there is a hamster behind him; and this is also shown when he believes that everyone died of Quinn's germ in "Quarantine," when they all pretend to be dead for Chase's "benefit," and in "Girls will be Boys" when Lola said, "Chase is gullible and Logan's a moron," referring to Chase believing that Lola was a boy. He works at PCA's Sushi Rox restaurant for the first three seasons. He is frequently seen playing or carrying a guitar and is also shown to play the cello. Chase once wrote a play for the school, and cast himself as a lifeguard who falls in love with a cute alien girl (played by Zoey), so they would actually kiss in the play; but Logan had a good audition for the male lead role and got the part instead (although Logan never did kiss Zoey). Chase's crush on Zoey strengthens between Seasons 2 and 3, and at the same time, there are hints that Zoey has a small crush on Chase, too. However, Chase decides to hold back his feelings for her, when he gets the idea he and Zoey are just meant to be friends (though it was never mentioned that he was officially over her).
In the TV movie "Goodbye Zoey?," Zoey is offered a chance to go to London with her parents and attend Covington Preparatory School, but she wants to ask Chase about it. However, he overhears rumors that she had already decided to go without talking with him. This hurts him, so he acts very bitter when Zoey comes to talk with him. He sarcastically convinces her she should go and he does not say goodbye to Zoey when she leaves. Chase learns from Michael about how much Zoey cared about his opinion and regrets his actions. Chase soon begins hanging out with a girl named Gretchen, who looks like Zoey but has a completely opposite personality. Logan and Michael finally talk to Chase about it, and he finally admits to missing Zoey, as well as to being in love with her. Due to a webcam malfunction, Zoey overhears and learns of his feelings for her. This leads to Chase moving to Covington so he can be with her, exactly at the same time that Zoey moves back to PCA so she can be with him. They talk to each other via video chat, and decide to go on a video chat "date," but it does not work out at all, due to a malfunction with the video chat. They decide to put off their relationship until Chase returns from England. Chase has a roommate at Covington named Colin, (Benjamin Diskin), which Chase mispronounces as "Colon." In the series's final episode, "Zoey 101: Chasing Zoey," Chase returns, and he and Zoey kiss. Later, it is revealed that they have become a couple and they spend the summer together in Hawaii.
On September 18, 2015, a video aired on TeenNick that reveals what Zoey said about Chase on a DVD in the episode "Time Capsule" (which aired on the same day in 2005). Chase and Zoey are no longer dating as Chase is seen proposing to a girlfriend named Alyssa. Before he can finish the proposal, Michael bursts into the restaurant and reveals he has dug up the time capsule to retrieve Zoey's DVD. Although Chase had forgotten, Michael reminds him that Zoey promised to tell him in 10 years what she said about him on the DVD, so he did not have to wait 20 years for the scheduled time capsule opening. Since they could not watch the video without a DVD player, Michael instead wrote down what Zoey said and reads it to Chase. Zoey said she really cares for Chase but suspects that he has a crush on her, reveals that the feeling may be mutual, and thinks Chase might even be her soulmate. Chase happily thanks Michael, takes back the engagement ring, and excitedly exits the restaurant to find Zoey.


=== Dana Cruz ===
Dana Cruz (Kristin Herrera) is one of Zoey's roommates in Season 1 and one of two main characters (James Garrett) to only appear in one season of the series. Dana is a tomboy and good at sports, particularly basketball. She also likes to skateboard. She loves to sleep, hates to be woken up, and considers mankind's greatest invention to be the snooze button. She frequently argues with her roommate Nicole Bristow.
Dana's bad attitude is comparable to that of Logan Reese, whom she cannot stand, although both have quite a bit in common and went to a school dance together. Dana has a strong-willed personality and will often try to do things on her own, which is shown in the episode "Jet X", but finds she succeeds more in a group. She tends to be thuggish, very aggressive and lazy.
In Season 2, Dana was accepted by a European student exchange program to study in Paris, which lasts for the rest of the series. She was originally written to end up as Logan's girlfriend but was replaced by Quinn Pensky. She appeared in a total of thirteen episodes, all in Season 1. Dana has two arguments throughout the series with Zoey Brooks. In "The PCA Survival Guide," her name is Dana Ramsey. She is a slob according to Nicole, but she can be sweet at times. It is never mentioned if Zoey or anyone else at PCA remained in contact with her after she left. Dana can be devious and knows how to mess with Logan. After Season 1, she is mentioned a few times in Season 2, but not seen in Seasons 2 through 4, nor is she mentioned during Seasons 3 or 4. She appeared on "PCA Confidential", but only in flashbacks.
The character was written off the series after Nickelodeon thought that Herrera looked too old for the part. Dana has the second-fewest appearances of all the main characters in the series, present for all of Season 1 and not seen again.


=== Michael Barret ===
Michael Barret (Christopher Massey) is Logan and Chase's roommate and best friend. Michael is a natural athlete, who plays the flute. He and Logan regularly urge Chase to open up about his feelings for Zoey. Michael, who was once addicted to potato chips, gets along with practically everyone at PCA. He is a very loyal and supportive friend who loves to make people laugh (he once became obsessed with making Quinn laugh when he found out that she did not think he was funny).
He had his own web show with Chase, called The Chase and Michael Show, which was said to be watched by only nine students at PCA initially and was cancelled for a short time by Dean Rivers in the Season 2 episode "Broadcast Views," after a segment intended to boost viewership (in which Zoey and Logan voice opposing opinions on various subjects about boys and girls) causes an argument among all the male and female students at PCA. Michael is a good singer, when he is not in front of girls he likes. He is sometimes the test subject of Quinn's science projects. Michael also likes to play with his Clackers, a toy which everybody else hates. On several occasions, when he does not wish for a certain course of action to be taken, he babbles that, "You can't—!" Someone then usually does what he said could not be done, causing him to respond by saying, "He/She just—!"
In the Season 3 episode "Drippin' Episode," he coins a slang word, "Drippin'," which was not credited to Logan. Logan doesn't tell two students that he coined the phrase to retaliate for being beaten up when it was discovered that the tonal frequency of Logan's imported, state-of-the-art cell phone from his father set off the fire alarms. Chase and Michael choose not to come to Logan's defense. In Season 4's "Rollercoaster," it is revealed that Michael has an immense fear of roller coasters, a secret that Logan spreads around campus, much to Michael's humiliation; Zoey convinces Michael to overcome his fear, eventually taking him to a coaster at a local theme park, though he is afraid initially, he gets over his fear of rollercoasters and realizes he actually likes riding them. He has a girlfriend named Lisa, who is friends with Zoey. His father gives him a stick-shift car, to drive Lisa to the prom.
Michael has the second-most appearances in the show, after Zoey.


=== Nicole Bristow ===
Nicole Bristow (Alexa Nikolas) is a student at PCA originally from Kansas, where her father owns a juice company. She is the second friend Zoey makes at PCA and one of her roommates in the first two seasons. She admires Zoey for her good ideas and enjoys going to her when she needs help. In Season 1, it is learned that she is "boy-crazy" and bad at sports, particularly disc golf and basketball. Nicole is a typical girly girl, who can be a little ditzy yet very sensitive. She also fears the thought of new roommates after her rivalry with Dana Cruz in Season 1, but gets along with Lola Martinez in Season 2. It is revealed in the episode, "New Roomies", in Season 1, that she loves boys and is obsessed with what they think of her.
In Season 2, it is revealed that Nicole is a straight-A student, but she keeps getting distracted by the cute boys in her class, until she is hypnotized by Quinn and Lola only to see boys as her grandfather. She is later sent to an all-girls school after being diagnosed with Obsessive Male Gender Disorder (OMGD), as revealed in the Season 3 premiere "Surprise". Although Zoey says it will not be for long and that she will come back, she is never seen in the series again. Nicole is mentioned several times throughout Season 3 but is not mentioned in Season 4. It is never revealed whether Zoey or anyone else at PCA remains in contact with her after she leaves. She appears in all 26 episodes of Seasons 1 and 2, including one TV movie, "Spring Break-Up". She also appeared in flashbacks in the episode "PCA Confidential".


=== Quinn Pensky ===
Quinn Pensky (Erin Sanders) is an extremely intelligent girl and also one of Lola and Zoey's best friends. She is from Seattle, Washington. She is best known for working on crazy experiments, which makes other students think she is a freak. Quinn is curious most of the time and is outlandish with her experiments. Quinn overlooks the dangers of most of her experiments, which almost always have a tendency to go awry (e.g., creating a breath spray that causes uncontrollable laughter, making a hair-growth formula that repeatedly generates hair, creating a humane mouse trap that shoots a plasma bolt, which accidentally knocks Lola unconscious, etc.). She is first seen in the pilot episode, when the girls challenge the boys to a basketball rematch; she is not a very good basketball player, but since she is embarrassed, she learns that basketball is just basic science and physics.
In the episode "New Roomies," it is revealed that she is also a budding inventor, referring to them as "Quinnventions." One of Quinn's inventions that does not go awry, but creates a nuisance, is a wristwatch that shoots lasers at the push of a button (seen in "Quarantine," where Quinn shoots a laser at a girl who she thinks Mark is dating behind her back, and also shoots one at Zoey, prompting Zoey to confiscate it, and "Chase's Grandma," in which Quinn shoots a laser to stop Michael's alarm clock from ringing, destroying it). Occasionally, she is shown to play the trombone. It is revealed in the Season 1 episode "Quinn's Date," that she has six toes on her right foot, which is later referenced in "Zoey's Balloon" when she announces the secret of her extra toe, in "Spring Break-Up" when she says she is not the fastest runner because of her extra toe, and in "Drippin' Episode" as she says the extra toe caused her to get charged a dollar more for her pedicure than Zoey and Lola were charged.
In the Season 2 episode "Quinn's Alpaca," it is revealed she has a pet alpaca named "Otis" back in her hometown, and she tries to leave PCA to be with him. She also has a pet rat, a spider named "Herman," and a snake named "Marvin." For the first two seasons, she lives by herself, and only once had Zoey as a roommate, until Quinn could not handle Zoey's disrespect and uptight attitude towards her science work. She becomes roommates with Zoey and Lola starting in Season 3, after Nicole leaves. Quinn is easily offended; as seen in "Chase's Girlfriend," she did not like being called a "spaz" when she was a child, and she teaches Logan a lesson by messing with him when she is teaching him how to work on his foul shot. She has him chase a taxidermied chicken on a remote control car and wear a dress to help him get over his nervousness when the crowd watches him take a shot. Quinn falls in love with Mark Del Figgalo and dates him throughout much of the series. At one point, Mark thinks it would be nice to put their relationship on hold, but Quinn dumps him when he starts dating Brooke Margolin. She hates Logan Reese, but shortly after she breaks up with Mark, Quinn and Logan fall in love and start dating in the beginning of season 4. They keep it a secret out of fear of what other students would say. She takes Dustin to the PCA prom in "Chasing Zoey," so she does not have to go with Logan and reveal their secret. They finally reveal their relationship, having grown tired of the stress of keeping it a secret, and seal the revelation with a kiss.


=== Logan Reese ===
Logan Reese (Matthew Underwood) is the spoiled son of a rich and famous film and TV producer named Malcolm Reese. Logan is considered a flirtatious jerk by many students. Logan likes to take pictures of himself and autograph them to give out to girls at PCA. His dad gave him money for all of the appliances in the boys' dorm room, and also for whatever Logan might want to buy. Logan once hid a camera in a bear to spy on the girls' lounge in Season 1. He thinks he is the best-looking guy on campus and is very stuck up and full of himself. He is portrayed as being less intelligent when it comes to school, exhibiting street smarts on many occasions, but it is revealed in the Season 3 episode "Zoey's Tutor" that he is very gifted in chemistry and is smart enough to tutor Zoey. He was tutored as a child, every summer, by his grandfather who works as a chemistry professor at Caltech University. He also enjoys being active and making out with girls. He also is portrayed to have a crush on Zoey on numerous occasions, including "Broadcast Views," where he flirts and asks her to make out, until he starts dating Zoey's best friend and roommate, Quinn Pensky.
Many girls are attracted to Logan, though many others are turned off by his cocky personality. He is shown to be overly competitive and will do anything to get what he wants, as shown in Season 3 "Hands on a Blix Van", in which he enters a competition to see who can keep their hands on a Blix Cola van the longest, to win a trip on a private jet. For the competition, Logan resorts to faking a leg injury in order to sit down while competing. He also scares a male student, fake-sneezes on a female student, claims he will be Stacey Dillsen's boyfriend for one week if she takes her hands off the van, and even locks Zoey in a portable bathroom during the contest's scheduled bathroom break. In many situations, however, Zoey, with the help of her friends, manages to come up with a plan to outsmart Logan.
In the TV movie Spring Break-Up, it is revealed that he has a beach house in Santa Barbara. While cocky, he continues to be good friends with Chase and Michael. Unlike Michael, instead of being supportive, Logan mocks Chase for his crush on Zoey, until Chase puts the relationship on hold in Season 3. However, when Chase seems to try to replace Zoey with another girl in "Goodbye Zoey?", Logan and Michael have an intervention for Chase. Logan helps Chase admit how much he misses and loves Zoey when he rips the head off a giraffe Zoey gave him, showing that he does care for Chase and wishes him to be happy. In spite of constantly annoying Zoey with his egotistical and immature attitude, Logan seems to care for her as well, especially when he helps Zoey keep from being expelled after she goes too far in a prank against the boys; and in an episode where she enters the boys' sparring challenge and is injured by a psychotic fighter, Logan defends her and scolds the fighter for being too violent with her, though he is violently beaten up later, showing how far he is willing to go to protect his friends. He also stands up to and fights his friend Vince Blake who tries to beat up Chase. In Season 4, Logan and Quinn begin dating, but keep it a secret. Logan seems to become nicer since he started dating Quinn. Despite the fact that Logan has always been obsessed with girls through the series, he suddenly loses interest in them after beginning to date Quinn, though no one notices this change. In the movie Zoey 101: Chasing Zoey, Logan takes Stacey Dillsen to the prom to keep his relationship with Quinn a secret. Logan and Quinn announce their relationship at the prom when Stacey is trying to kiss him and he instantly shouts that he loves Quinn. She returns the message and they seal their announcement with a kiss.


=== Lola Martinez ===
Lola Martinez (Victoria Justice) is an aspiring movie star who came to PCA after Dana moved out. She first appears in the Season 2 episode "Back to PCA"; Lola became the new roommate of Zoey and Nicole, and became Quinn's roommate in Season 3. As an acting exercise, Lola pretends to be a "freaky goth chick" by wearing a white wig, black clothes, trying to pierce her tongue, and speaking to the dead on her first day at PCA, frightening Zoey and Nicole to the point where they wish to sleep in tents outdoors, rather than share a room with her. They hear a phone call that reveals the truth that she was simply acting, and in the morning they stage a fight to show her they can also act.
Lola is dedicated to her dream of becoming a famous Hollywood actress, and confident of winning an Oscar award by her 19th birthday. Her true acting talent becomes apparent in "Girls Will Be Boys", when she fools Chase and Logan into thinking she is a boy, in order to make the point that boys do not have to behave differently when girls are around. She is overly confident in a dream in "Son of a Dean", when she says it is her "destiny" to win a raffle to the premiere of the movie Peaches 'n' Cream. In "Lola Likes Chase", Lola dates Chase briefly after she developed a crush on him during a review session when he tutored her for her biology exam. They date throughout the episode, but split up when Lola is convinced that it was not working and believes he has feelings for someone else.
Lola enjoys talking; she loses her voice in "Quarantine", after practicing her scream too much for a part in a play. This makes the rest of the gang very happy, because they are all quarantined in the girls' dorm room, and get fed up with her screaming all the time. She can talk in a very convincing British accent, as shown in "Dance Contest". She is afraid of people in big costumes, due to an accident with a man in a giant hot dog costume that took place when she was younger, as revealed in "Zoey's Balloon".
Lola can also tell if a boy is a good kisser by eating an apple. Her crush, Leaf, from "Curse of PCA", appears to be identified by Lola as a "good kisser".
In the episode "Vince is Back", it is revealed that Lola likes Vince, who has come back to PCA after being expelled. She kisses Vince four times, after she finds out that he has changed. It is then clear that the two are dating. Vince is also in her yoga class. She and Vince like to make out. In "Walk-A-Thon", Lola also enjoys knitting, but is terrible at it, as she forgets to put in a head hole when knitting a sweater. In the series finale "Chasing Zoey", Vince takes Lola out to the prom. Although her name is Lola Martinez in the series, on the Pacific Coast Academy website in her section "Lolascopes", her name is Lola Camacho.


=== James Garrett ===
James Garrett (Austin Butler) is Zoey's ex-boyfriend and new roommate of Logan and Michael. He is originally from Santa Fe, New Mexico. He takes Chase's old bedroom, much to the dismay of Michael and Logan. They make it very clear that they do not want him there and he eventually gets the point and leaves. Logan starts a rumor that James and Zoey are dating. Michael comes to James's new bedroom and apologizes, inviting him back to live with them. The two of them get Logan to admit that the rumor he spread about James and Zoey was untrue. Later in the same episode, James and Zoey kiss and become a couple. James repeatedly helps the girls get back at Logan.
In "Chasing Zoey," James gets Zoey a necklace with an inscription that says, "I love you." She does not talk to him and ends up breaking up with him, saying she loves him but "there's something in the way." They decide to remain friends. In the alternative ending to the final episode, he dances with an unknown girl, implying that he has fallen for someone else and will leave Zoey alone.


== Recurring characters ==


=== PCA students ===


==== Mark Del Figgalo ====
Mark Del Figgalo (Jack Salvatore, Jr.) is Quinn's ex-boyfriend. Before he and Quinn broke up, he was involved with most of her experiments. Mark made cameos throughout Season 1, making his first appearance in "New Roomies" as Dustin's student. He made his only major appearance in "Quinn's Date," and became Quinn's boyfriend after the episode. He has no emotions and is portrayed as being very boring, although he does smile sometimes, but not often. According to Quinn, he is very cute and dreamy, but to Zoey and her roommates, Dana, Nicole and Lola, he is not cute at all. He kissed Quinn several times; however, the first time they kissed was in "The Radio," two years after they started dating. He loves salami and likes plain (no butter, sour cream, etc.) baked potatoes; he is lactose intolerant. Mark also collects rocks, as shown in some of the later episodes. In "Quinn Misses the Mark," he breaks up with Quinn and dates a girl named Brooke, who dumps him because he is not exciting. Michael, Logan, Chase and sometimes Zoey usually just call him by his last name, "Del Figgalo," whereas Quinn and Lola usually call him "Mark." Michael and Logan also sometimes call him "Del Figgs." Mark collects antique calendars and likes to knit. The girls Mark has dated are: Courtney (Season 1), Quinn Pensky (Seasons 1-4), Brooke Margolin (Season 4), and he is seen dancing with Stacey Dillsen at the end of "Chasing Zoey," (Season 4).
Mark appears in 28 out of 65 episodes throughout the series.


==== Stacey Dillsen ====
Stacey Dillsen (Abby Wilde) is a student at PCA. She has a very noticeable lisp. She has an obsession with cotton swabs and white glue, which is used in different arts and crafts, and she sings a song: "You can sip it in the morning, sip it in the evening, even at a quarter to three, 'cause I like sassafras, you like sassafras, we all like sassafras tea!"
Stacey has a crush on Logan Reese, because of his muscular physique, and frequently calls him "hot and spicy," though this repulses and irritates Logan. Stacey becomes the roommate of Lola and Quinn in "Goodbye Zoey?: Part 2", after Zoey leaves to go to a boarding school in London. In "Chasing Zoey," Logan (Quinn's secret boyfriend) asks Stacey to prom because Quinn and Logan picked a date for each other for prom, so nobody would suspect that they were dating. While Michael tries to teach Mark how to drive a stick shift to the prom, Mark accidentally hits Stacey, causing her to lose her lisp, which allows her to speak "perfectly" (in her opinion). After she gets hit by the car, it seems that Stacey and Mark are going out.Stacey began as a recurring character in Season 3, and was present in 31 of the 39 combined episodes making up Seasons 3 and 4. She does not appear in the Season 3 episodes "Surprise," "Hot Dean," "Zoey's Tutor," "The Silver Hammer Society," "Wrestling," "Chase's Grandma" and "Drippin' Episode," and the Season 4 episode "Quinn Misses the Mark." Unlike several other main characters, Stacey made an appearance in the episode "PCA Confidential" and not just in the flashbacks from past episodes. Two years after the end of Zoey 101, Stacey made two appearances in Season 4 of iCarly. In the episode "iStart a Fan War," it is shown that Stacey lisps again. She reappeared in "iHire an Idiot," being interviewed for the position as an intern working for iCarly. She was quickly kicked out by Carly, who is annoyed by the lisp. In 2013, Stacey appears on Sam & Cat where she is sent to the hospital after a bike accident. Later in the episode, it is revealed that she graduated from PCA several years ago and is a sophomore at San Francisco State University.


==== Jeremiah Trotman ====
Jeremiah Trotman (Creagen Dow) is the school anchorman (who does the PCA news), who reports on all the happenings around PCA. He takes his job very seriously, and can always be spotted wearing his trademark orange Converse as part of his anchorman attire. After most of his broadcasts, he pauses, then says "courage." In "Chasing Zoey," he sees Zoey alone and is interested in taking her to the prom, even if he has to get "rid" of his date, Martha. He plans on leaving school after graduation to head to New York with hopes of becoming a network news anchor.
Jeremiah appeared in 14 episodes of Zoey 101, making his first appearance as a recurring character in the Season 2 episode "Election." Jeremiah also makes an appearance in the Season 2 episode "Robot Wars," in the Season 3 episodes "Hot Dean," "Quarantine," "Wrestling," "Son of the Dean," and "Goodbye Zoey: Part 1" and "Goodbye Zoey: Part 2," and in the Season 4 episodes "Rumor of Love," "Anger Management," "Quinn Misses the Mark," "Walk-a-Thon," and "Chasing Zoey: Part 1" and "Chasing Zoey: Part 2."


==== Vince Blake ====
Vincent "Vince" Blake (Brando Eaton) first appeared in "The Great Vince Blake," and he is a star football player, who is supposed to be the best high school quarterback on the planet. He is very popular at PCA, a "chick magnet," and a hero who many other guys look up to. Chase seems to be the only one bothered by Vince's special attention and popularity. However, Vince is discovered to be very dishonest, when Chase catches him cheating on a test. Chase turns him in, causing Vince to be put on academic probation. Enraged, he rounds up the football team and beats up Chase, along with Michael, Logan and Mark Del Figgalo, who stand against them with Chase. Henceforth, Vince is expelled from PCA.
Vince comes back in "Vince Is Back," and appears to have had a change of heart. The guys want revenge on Vince for beating them up while the girls decide to just ignore him. However, he and Lola have the same yoga class, and while she tries to ignore him, she can not resist how nice he has actually become and ends up kissing him four times; they later become a couple. Eventually Zoey, Quinn, Logan and Michael forgive him, and they all become friends with him. It is unclear if Chase ever forgives him; Chase does not react to Vince at the end of "Chasing Zoey," when Chase comes back from England. Vince makes his final appearance in "Chasing Zoey," taking Lola to the prom.


==== Lisa Perkins ====
Lisa Perkins (Lisa Tucker) is Michael's girlfriend throughout Seasons 3 and 4. She first appears in "Michael Loves Lisa" and becomes Michael's girlfriend. Before dating Michael, she dated another boy, who ran away in fear when Chase's go-kart went out of control during Lisa and her boyfriend's picnic. She appears again in the episode "Hands on a Blix Van," breaking up and reuniting with Michael after he makes fun of her necklace, thinking that it is a necklace that Lisa, herself, said was horrible. She then appears in the final two episodes of the series, "Roller Coaster" and "Chasing Zoey."


==== Wayne "Firewire" Gilbert ====
Wayne "Firewire" Gilbert (Allen Evangelista) is a tech geek in the science club. In "Robot Wars," his name is revealed to be Wayne Gilbert, and he gets upset when they do not call him "Firewire." He works on a robot which exceeds the maximum height of 36 inches, and therefore has to use the robot without its 39-inch tall "hammer." He appears again helping Rebecca get revenge on Zoey, and also helps Michael and Logan to get revenge on Vince. He wants to be Ryan Seacrest. Quinn hates him, because he and his two friends (from "Robot Wars") would not let her join the science club, because she is a girl. His last appearance is in "Chasing Zoey," when he and his friends think the world is ending and run into the woods for safety, returning when they hear that Zoey is not going to the dance.


==== Rebecca Martin ====
Rebecca (Daniella Monet) is Chase's girlfriend at the start of Season 3. However, they break up because Rebecca hates Zoey and tries to tell Chase to stay away from her. Later in the episode "Zoey's Balloon" as revenge, Rebecca threatens to embarrass Zoey if she does not do whatever Rebecca says. Such things include wearing a banana costume and dancing "The Macalana" (a parody of the "Macarena," a song by Los del Rio). However, Zoey and her friends manage to thwart Rebecca. Rebecca only appears in Season 3.


==== Brooke Margolin ====
Brooke (Mariah Buzolin) becomes Mark's girlfriend. Mark breaks up with Quinn, finding he and Brooke share several common interests. Brooke is seen in three episodes of Season 4. Logan said that Brooke was "hot" when Quinn told Logan that Mark fell in love with Brooke. Brooke dumped Mark at the end of the Zoey 101 movie "Chasing Zoey," because he was not exciting.


==== Gretchen ====
Gretchen (Madison Riley) is a slob and a do-nothing. She is Chase's Zoey replacement, and is only seen in "Goodbye Zoey?". Lola, Quinn, Michael and Logan all hate her. Chase hangs out with her to get his mind off Zoey (yet she looks like Zoey), since Zoey left PCA. Gretchen is seen doing various disgusting things, including digging in her nose, scratching her armpits, spitting, and popping her zits at lunch. She randomly takes a bite out of Quinn's apple. All of this is considered gross by Lola, Quinn, Michael and Logan, but Chase does not seem to notice, wanting to believe her to be just like Zoey. Eventually, he admits the truth. Despite the similar appearances, Gretchen and Zoey have many opposite characteristics.


==== Vicky ====
Vicky (Miki Ishikawa) is a recurring character in Season 1. Vicky is an Asian-American girl, who spoke to Zoey on numerous occasions.


==== Leif ====
Leif (Jarron Vosburg) guides everyone to Red Stone Gulch in the Season 3 episode "Curse of PCA." He leads them there, so he can spend more time with Lola because he likes her. Lola and Leif's seemingly constant kissing upset everyone else. Leif is a senior, and it is said that he graduated but could not get into a good college. He does not appear in any other episode.


=== Adults ===


==== Coco Wexler ====
Coco Wexler (Jessica Chaffin) is the girls' dorm advisor, who is sensitive and a crybaby. She is often seen eating canned ravioli and is an emotional wreck half the time. She breaks up and gets back together with her boyfriend Carl on almost a weekly basis and during the break-ups, she is seen crying and venting to students, mainly the girls. In one episode a new dean appears during her breakup, so Zoey and her roommates set Coco up on a date with him and things turn shaky when Coco's ex-boyfriend Carl finds out. When she gets nervous, she sweats a lot, as revealed in the episode "Hot Dean."
Coco later makes a surprise cameo in the Sam & Cat episode "#FirstClassProblems" where she sits next to Sam & Cat who are waiting to board their flight to the Bahamas. While they wait, Coco reveals that she married Carl but later got divorced and that Carl is to marry Coco's mother in the Bahamas.


==== Dean Rivers ====
Dean Charles W. Rivers (Christopher Murray) is the Dean of PCA. He is married to his overbearing wife and spends a lot of money on video games. He and Zoey often have different ideas on things, like vending machines. His full name, as shown in "Spring Fling," was "Charles W. Rivers" on a sign next to Dana that is seen after the girls ask Dean Rivers about putting up a fundraiser. However, in "Quinn's Alpaca," his wife called him "Carl." He likes lions, but was attacked by one in "Fake Roommate." He was also a student at PCA, and revealed he won the PCA golf tournament when he was a senior.


==== Kazu ====
Kazu (Brian Tee) is a Japanese-American from Alabama. He is the manager of PCA's restaurant Sushi Rox, which is accidentally burned down but later rebuilt. He makes his first appearance in "Webcam." He later appears in "People Auction" and "Hot Dean," and makes cameo appearances in "Quarantine" and "Quinn Misses the Mark."


==== Nurse Crocker ====
Nurse Margeret Crocker (Mariah Sussman) appears in Seasons 3 and 4 and replaces Nurse Krutcher, who is in Seasons 1-2. She is seen several times taking care of Zoey and Michael and takes care of Zoey in "The Curse of PCA."


==== Nurse Krutcher ====
Nurse Francine Krutcher (Diane Delano) is the nurse at PCA in Seasons 1 and 2. She is very mean and does not let the sick or hurt PCA students leave. In the Season 1 episode, "The Play," it is revealed she can be violent and is seen pouncing on and dragging the sick students, such as the scene where Chase tries to escape to keep Zoey from kissing Logan.


==== Mr. Takato ====
Mr. Takato (James Hong) is an old man who teaches Michael how to drive a stick shift in "Chasing Zoey." He says that he is a lower school math teacher, but no one else had heard of him. At the end of the movie, he appears before Michael one final time, mounted atop a Water Buffalo, wearing a rice hat. Michael asks him to come and tell his girlfriend, Lisa, that he had taught Michael how to drive a stick shift, but Mr. Takato responds by telling Michael that he "does not exist," and rides off into the night, mysteriously vanishing into thin air. Whether or not Mr. Takato is real is unknown.


==== Mr. David H. Bender ====
Mr. Bender (Michael Blieden) is the school's film and tech teacher. David Bender was also a former PCA student and a member of the cheerleading squad. He is a favorite throughout Season 1. In one episode, he helps the group get back to PCA after they visited the wrong beach. He makes appearances in Season 2. In "Chasing Zoey," his name is announced over the loudspeaker at the prom. It is also mentioned in the episode "Favor Chain" that Lola is babysitting his son, while Mr. Bender and his wife go out.


==== Seamus Finnigan ====
Seamus Finnigan is PCA's maintenance man. He was Dean Rivers' former classmate at PCA, where they competed on the golfing team. He does not like Dean Rivers. He only appears in "Alone at PCA," and shares a name with the Harry Potter character.


==== Malcolm Reese ====
Malcolm Reese (Michael Corbett) is Logan's father. Malcolm lives in Santa Barbara, with his assistant, Ciara. He debuts in Spring Break-Up, and is also in "Logan Gets Cut Off".


==== Ms. Burvich ====
Ms. Burvich (Suzanne Krull) is divorced and assigns rooms at PCA. She appears in Seasons 2 and 4 and is first seen in "Back to PCA." Nicole breaks Ms. Burvich's hard-earned collection of rare perfume bottles, causing Ms. Burvich to hold a grudge against Zoey and Nicole and reject their plea to choose their new roommate. Her second appearance is in "Fake Roommate," when Michael and Logan try to trick her into thinking that Chase is still at PCA after he has moved to England, because they do not want a new roommate. Her third appearance is in "Rumor of Love" when Ms. Burvich introduces Michael and Logan to their new roommate, James Garrett.


== Guest stars ==


=== Paige Howard ===
Paige Howard (Miranda Cosgrove), who appears once in "Paige at PCA," seems to be the smartest young girl on the Pacific coast. She wants to run the whole campus on "Paige Power," to save a lot of energy. Her name also appears in Chase's phone contacts in the episode "Little Beach Party."


=== Stacy ===
Stacy (Allison Scagliotti) is a student at PCA who steals Zoey's backpack idea in the episode "Backpack." Stacy remains Zoey's enemy after the episode.


=== Keith Finch ===
Keith Finch (Erik Walker) only appears in "Defending Dustin." He intimidates Dustin after Dustin corrects Keith's mistake in their math class. He remains Dustin's enemy after the episode.


=== Greg ===
Greg (Stephen Lunsford) is a boy who Lisa Perkins dates. He breaks up with Lisa when she kisses Michael.


=== Lance Rivers ===
Lance Rivers (Ben Perry) is the son of Dean Rivers. He cheats to be able to go to a premiere with Zoey. Lola and Quinn tell Zoey their bad vibe from Lance, but Zoey still goes to the premiere. Zoey later ditches Lance in his limo when she realizes what a jerk he is.


=== Trisha Kirby ===
Trisha Kirby (Jennette McCurdy) is the "bad girl" in Dustin's grade, who has a passion for being crude. She dates Dustin in the episode "Bad Girl." Zoey ends up trying to break the two up.


=== Courtney ===
Courtney (Zoe Keller) is Mark Del Figgalo's ex-girlfriend. Her only appearance is on the Season 1 episode "Quinn's Date," in which she accuses Mark of "cheating" on her, after she caught Mark on a "date" with Quinn Pensky.


== References ==

Descriptions of Characters


== External links ==
Official Teen Nick main character list