The Apprentice (UK series three)

Series three of The Apprentice (UK), a British reality television, was broadcast in the UK during 2007, from 28 March to 13 June on BBC One. Following favourable ratings, the BBC moved the programme onto its mainstream channel and thus to a much wider audience, with its companion discussion show The Apprentice: You're Fired! being reallocated to BBC Two as part of the move.For this series, Alan Sugar commented that its production would include "tougher tasks and better people" as a means of making the programme stand out from other shows like Big Brother. This series is notable for a candidate leaving the show, despite securing a place in the final, which drew criticism of sexual discrimination in the aftermath of the respective episode's broadcast. Alongside the usual twelve episodes, the series also featured two specials – the first, entitled "Beyond the Boardroom", was aired on 3 June prior to the eleventh episode; the second, entitled "Why I Fired Them", was aired on 10 June prior to the broadcast of the series finale.
This series saw in a change in the show's format, allowing for sixteen candidates to take part in the third series, with Simon Ambrose becoming the overall winner. Excluding the specials, the series averaged around 5.62 million viewers during its broadcast.


== Series overview ==
With viewing figures proving favourable since the programme's debut in 2005, the BBC decided that The Apprentice needed to be more accessible to a "mainstream" audience. In discussions between them and the production company, it was agreed that the show be relocated to BBC One, retaining it scheduling arrangements, while also requiring that its sister show, You're Fired, be moved over to BBC Two to make it also accessible to a wider audience. Work on the new series included Alan Sugar arranging for a more tougher set of challenges to be faced by participants, and recruiting a more varied collection of participants than had been seen in the previous series. Sugar believed that by doing this it would keep the show fresh, and thus avoid it becoming just another version of existing reality programmes at the time, such as Big Brother. A example of this was having mixed gender teams at the beginning of the process, albeit a male and female candidate switching places with each other, rather than at a later task in the process as is more common in the programme's format found in other series.
One of the biggest changes made by the production staff, besides the change of channel for episode broadcast, focused on an issue that Sugar raised in the previous series over firing candidates. With the show attracting a far greater number of applications for participation, resulting in staff conducting interviews, auditions and assessments on over 10,000 applicants, the decision was made to increase the number of candidates that formed up the final line-up while still maintaining the use of twelve episodes for the series, thus allowing Sugar to fire more than one candidate at any time before the Interviews stage. When production began, 16 applicants found themselves taking part in the third series, in which the first task saw the men form under the team name of Stealth, while the women formed under the team name of Eclipse. It is the first series to feature a candidate leaving the process despite having won a place into the next stage – the decision by Katie Hopkins to depart towards the end of the Interviews stage, garnered considerable criticism over sexual discrimination in the aftermath of the episode's broadcast.
Of those who took part, Simon Ambrose would become the eventual winner of the series, and go on to work at Sugar's property company Amsprop, overseeing development projects, before leaving Sugar's employment in 2010 to focus on setting up in the restaurant business. The move to BBC One proved to be a reasonable decision, as it led to a further improvement in viewing figures for the programme during its broadcast – by the end of the series, The Apprentice reached a peak of 6.8 million viewers watching the series finale.


=== Candidates ===


=== Performance chart ===
Key:

     The candidate won this series of The Apprentice.
     The candidate was the runner-up.
     The candidate won as project manager on his/her team, for this task.
     The candidate lost as project manager on his/her team, for this task.
     The candidate was on the winning team for this task / they passed the Interviews stage.
     The candidate was on the losing team for this task.
     The candidate was brought to the final boardroom for this task.
     The candidate was fired in this task.
     The candidate lost as project manager for this task and was fired.
     The candidate left the competition on this task.


== Episodes ==


== Criticism ==


=== Unfair behaviour to candidates ===
Following their appearances on The Apprentice, both Gerri Blackwood and Tre Azam criticized the programme for how it treated the candidates. Blackwood mostly made allegations against the filming of the programme, stating that candidates were given misleading information by Hewer and Mountford, and that female contestants were forced to shower together in the same bathroom in the candidate's house, after two of its five bathrooms were closed by the production team, who allocated a third to the film crew. Azam's allegation mainly focused on the programme's editing and the portrayal of candidates, mostly himself, stating that his portrayal had been "dumbed down" in comparison to the other candidates.


=== Negative remarks over a product ===
After the sixth episode of the series was broadcast, the programme received criticism over Sugar's negative comments about a brand of cheese sold by wholesale chain Makro and manufacturer Wyke Farms. Both parties refuted his belief that viewers would not likely find the brand being sold in France, and pointed out that Sugar lacked any knowledge of the cheese market to have had reason to verbally blast Paul Callaghan for choosing to take the product to sell there.


=== Sexual discrimination accusations ===
Following the broadcast of the eleventh episode, several organisation, including the Trades Union Congress, the Liberal Democrats, The Equal Opportunities Commission and the Recruitment and Employment Confederation, accused Alan Sugar of sexism and breaching the 1976 Sex Discrimination act. The accusations were made in regards to him only questioning contestants Katie Hopkins and Kristina Grimes about their child-care arrangements, and not Tre Azam who was himself a parent. While the incident was well documented within the media, none of those who made accusations took into account that both women were single parents at the time of the interviews, in comparison to Azam who was married, and that Hopkins resigned from the programme after declining Sugar's initial offer of being one of the finalists during this episode.Despite this, Sugar responded in his defence to his actions, when appearing on GMTV, that he was aware of all rules regarding sexual discrimination within the workplace. Simon Ambrose later denied claims from internet conspiracists that Katie's exit from the show was fixed, and that the segments were re-filmed and edited in later, insisting that nothing had been changed with the final edit of the episode.


== Ratings ==
Official episode viewing figures are from BARB.


=== Specials ===


== References ==


== External links ==
The Apprentice at BBC Online