Buenavista, Quezon

Buenavista, officially the Municipality of Buenavista, (Tagalog: Bayan ng Buenavista),  is a 4th class municipality in the province of Quezon, Philippines. According to the 2015 census, it has a population of 30,047 people.It was formerly known as Piris.


== Barangays ==
Buenavista is politically subdivided into 37 barangays.


== Local government ==


=== Mayors ===
Francisco Falqueza (appointed) Aug.26, 1950- Dec.31,1951
Primitivo Pasta Sr. (first elected Mayor) 1951-1955
Eustaquio Cawa 1955-1963
Domingo Reyes 1963-1986
Edgardo San Juan (elected Vice Mayor acted as OIC-mayor early 1982-1986)
Alex Ang (OIC-Mayor) 1986-1987
Vicente Cawa 1988-1995
Florencio Villamater 1995-2001
Ramon Reyes 2001-2007
Ma. Remedios Rivera 2007-2016
Alexander Rivera 2016–present


== Demographics ==


== History ==
Piris was its former name. It was a mere hamlet of the municipality of Guinanyagan, province of Quezon and remained as such for quite a number of years until it finally became a municipality. Buenavista is now its official name which means beautiful view. Its original name was Piri as engraved in the oldest church bell which was donated by one Don Jose Casal in the year 1866. It used to be located in the Sitio of Pinagbayanan situated in the western side of the Piris River which is about one a half kilometers away from the present town site. This place became the choice of the founders who were a mixture of Bicolanos and Visayans to enable them to easily escape the Moro raids that were prevalent during the olden times. When the raids finally subsided, the barrio of Piris was transferred to its present location. The word Piri was changed to Piris and later re-changed to Piris.Buenavista has a land area of 16,113 hectares and is situated on the Bondoc Peninsula. At present It is a third class municipality. Its population is 30,047 as per latest official census and it has 37 barangays. Its climate is classified as type 3 which means the rainfall is evenly distributed throughout the year. 
The main dialect is Filipino, although the Bicolanos, Visayan and Ilocano dialect are commonly used in the barangays.
In October 1936, some civic minded residents launched the proposition of making the place a municipality. They signed a petition for the separation of Piris from the municipality of Guinayangan. A group of seven members was formed and was commissioned to undertake a delegation to the Office of the Secretary of the Interior for the purpose. The group was composed of then Don Feliciano Roldan, Mariano San Jose, Honorio Hutamares, Teodorico Dosto, Ciriaco Parraba, Atty. Antonio Pasta and Francisco San Jose. The outbreak of the second global war marked the failure of the offices concerned to convert the place into a regular municipality.
After the election of Gaudencio V. Vera to the Office of the Congressman for the second district of Quezon Province, Francisco San Jose, a native and public teacher of the place, was instructed by Congressman Vera to help prepare the necessary papers pertaining to the separation of Piris from Guinayangan. When the papers were prepared, House Bill No. 83 which was sponsored by the energetic solon was passed by both houses of Congress and became Republic Act No. 495 under Proclamation No. 201 of his Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, the corporate existence of Piris in the name Buenavista the 37th municipality of Quezon province, was fixed on 26 August 1950. An inauguration was celebrated by the town people under the leadership of Domingo Reyes and late Yao Ching Kio, wealthy businessman of the place, with Congressman Vera as the guest of honor. When the municipality of Buenavista was inaugurated on August 26, 1950,it belonged to the seventh class. Six months thereafter, due to some increase in revenue, it rose to sixth class. Late Francisco Falqueza was appointed Municipal Mayor and held office beginning August 26, 1950 up to December 31, 1951 and on November 13, 1951 local election Primitivo Pasta Sr. becoming the first elected mayor.


== Religions ==
Roman Catholic
Iglesia Ni Cristo
Church Of God
Seventh-Day Adventist
Born Again
Baptist
Islam
Jehovah's Witnesses


== Geography ==
The municipality of Buenavista is located on the eastern part of Quezon Province. It is bounded on the Northern part of Guinayangan, Quezon, on the south by the town of San Narciso, on the western part by Lopez and Catanauan and on the east by Ragay Gulf towards Bicol Region. The municipality is about 226 km Southeast of Metro Manila and about 114 km. Southeast of provincial Capital, the city of Lucena. It is accessible by land via Lopez and Catanauan or in water transportation via Guinayangan from Lucena City.


== Topography ==
Buenavista is primarily upland municipality characterized by ragged terrain, generally hilly or mountainous with high plains, valleys and swamps. It lies on different slopes from 0-15% and above. There are three (3) types of soil that covers the municipality. These are Faraon Clay, Catanauan Clay loam and Bolinao Clay loam. This is the most extensive upland soil of the province mostly found in Bondoc Peninsula. Faraon Clay loam covers about 13,133.75 hectares which is 85% of the total land area of the municipality, 10%is said to be catanauan Clay loam and 5% of the total land area in Bolinao Clay loam. The greater portion of the soil types is used for grazing. The low-lying hills are planted to coconut and seasonal crops like corn, root crops, and fruit bearing trees.
Catanauan Clay loam is found in the valley is used mostly on paddy rice field, while Bolinao Clay loam is devoted to coconut, bananas and other crops and some part has a mineral deposit like in Barangay Bulo and Cadlit.
Cabong
Cabong is a barangay of the Philippine municipality Buenavista in the province Quezon in Calabarzon which is part of the Luzon group of islands.
Cabong is one of the barangays which are in the outlying area of Municipality Buenavista.
The municipality Buenavista with a population of about 24,798 and its 37 barangays belong to the partly urban areas in the Philippines. While some of the barangays developed modern urban structures, some others, especially those which are seated in the outlying areas, remained rural. By the end of 2007 Cabong had 686 residents.


== References ==


== External links ==
Philippine Standard Geographic Code
Philippine Census Information
Local Governance Performance Management System