Kainai Nation

The Kainai Nation (or Káínawa, or Blood Tribe) is a First Nations band government in southern Alberta, Canada, with a population of 12,800 members in 2015.Akáínaa translates directly to "Many Chief" (from aká - "many" and nínaa - "chief") while Káína translates directly to "Many Chief people." The enemy Plains Cree called the Kainai Miko-Ew - "stained with blood", i.e. "the bloodthirsty, cruel", therefore, the common English name for the tribe is the "Blood tribe."
The Kainai speak a language of the Algonquian linguistic group; their dialect is closely related to those of the Siksika and Peigan. They are one of three nations comprising the Blackfoot Confederacy.
At the time treaties such as Treaty 7 were signed, the Kainai were situated on the Oldman, Belly, and St. Mary rivers west of Lethbridge, Alberta. The Kainai reserve Blood 148 is currently the largest in Canada with 4,570 inhabitants  on 1,414.03 km² and is located approximately 200 kilometres south of Calgary. As of December 2013, the Kainai Nation had a total registered population of 11,791 people.


== Economy ==
The Kainai nation is engaged in diverse enterprises and they trade with domestic and international partners. Ammolite mining for example provides a rare highly demanded  gem mineral to Asia for Feng Shui. Ammolite is currently known only to be found in the Bearpaw Formation as unique conditions of prehistoric were optimal for the fossilization of marine life into Ammolite. Over the years, mining operations have uncovered several oceanic dinosaur fossils which have been stored for study at the Royal Tyrrell Museum however they belong to the Kainai nation.(Lawrynuik)


== Specific Claims ==
The Kainai Nation filed many specific claims with the federal government. In 2017, a federal court ruled that the crown had underestimated the band's population, which resulted in the band's reserve being smaller that they should have been. As such, the Blood Tribe reserve could be expanded by 421, but the community could seek a cash-in-lieu-of-land settlement for this claim instead.In July 2019, the Kainai nation settled a claim over crown mismanagement of the band's ranching assets. The community received a $150 Millions cash settlement. Chief Roy Fox said that $123 Million of this settlement will be used to develop "housing, capital works, a new administration building and a new skating rink".


== Government ==


=== Band council ===
The Kainai Nation is governed by an elected council of twelve to fifteen, with one chief. The term of office is four years. Historical chiefs of the Kainai are below:

Last of the Hereditary Chiefs Traditional Chief Jim Shot Both Sides (1956–1980)

Chief Chris Shade (1996–2004)
Chief Charles Weasel Head (2004–2016)
Chief Roy Fox (Makiinimaa – Curlew) (2016-Present)Blood Tribe Councillors (2019)
Dorothy First Rider (Itoomomaahkaa – Front Runner)
Floyd Big Head (Piitaika’tsis – Eagle Arrow)
Kyla Crow (Komiikakato’saakii – Round Star Woman)
Martin Heavy Head (Ponokaiksikksinamm – White Elk)
Joanne Lemieux (Aahkoyinnimaakii – Pipe Woman)
Robin Little Bear (Soyiikayaakii – Mink Woman)
Kirby Many Fingers (Apanssaapii – Counting Cue)
Hank Shade (Aapiisii – Coyote)
Lance Tailfeathers (Naatsikapoikkanaa – Two Stars Shining)
Tim Tailfeathers (Naato’kisikapiohkitopiyi-Rides Two Grey Horse)
Marcel Weasel Head (Niitsayoohkiitohkitopiyi)
Franklyn White Quills (Makoyaapii – Wolf Old Man)


=== Police force ===
In pre-treaty times, the iikunuhkahtsi were a society responsible for the punishment of misdeeds.  The Blood reserve is currently policed by the Blood Tribe Police, with 31 officers in 2015.

		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


== Notable people ==
Red Crow - 1887 Treaty Number Seven Chief
Byron Chief-Moon - performer and choreographer
Eugene Creighton (Owns Many Horses)steplewis
Eugene Brave Rock - actor and stunt man
Faye HeavyShield - artist
Marie Smallface Marule - academic administrator, activist, and educator
Jerry Potts
Pete Standing Alone
Wayne Plume (1931-2015) - Standoff Mayor 1990's-early 2000's
Seen from afar (1810-1869) - PEENAQUIM (Pe-na-koam, Penukwiim, translated as seen from afar, far seer, far off in sight, and far off dawn; also known as Onis tay say nah que im, Calf Rising in Sight, and Bull Collar), chief of the Blood tribe of the Blackfoot nation; b. c. 1810, probably in what is now southern Alberta, son of Two Suns; d. 1869 near the present city of Lethbridge, ALB
Clevermac (MAC) Mackenzie - famous PUBG player


== Media ==
In 1960, the Kainai and their sacred Sun Dance were featured in the National Film Board of Canada documentary Circle of the Sun. Tribal leaders had been concerned that the Sun Dance might be dying out, and had permitted filming as a visual record.In 2006, community leader Rick Tailfeathers contributed a small ammolite carving of a buffalo skull to the Six String Nation project. The object was permanently mounted on the interior of Voyageur, the guitar at the heart of the project.. Following a presentation about the project in September of 2014 at Tatsikiisaapo'p Middle School, project creator Jowi Taylor was presented with a braid of sweetgrass by school principal Ramona Big Head. The braid resides in the headstock area in the bed of the guitar case.
On National Aboriginal Day in 2011, the NFB released the Pete Standing Alone trilogy, which includes Circle of the Sun, Standing Alone and a 2010 film, Round Up, documenting 50 years of the Kainai Nation as well as the life of elder Pete Standing Alone.


=== Historical Newspapers ===

Kainai News -- The Kainai News (1968-1991) was one of Canada's first aboriginal newspapers and instrumental in the history of aboriginal journalism in Canada. It was published in southern Alberta by the Blood Indian Tribe and later by Indian News Media. Content focused on a range of local issues within the reserve as well as national issues such as the Indian Act, the Whitepaper and Bill C-31. Of particular significance are editorial cartoons by Everett Soop which were a regular feature of the newspaper.  Its first editor way Caen Bly, granddaughter of Senator James Gladstone.
Sun Dance Echo -- The Sun Dance Echo (1964-1966) was a predecessor to the Kainai News. It was edited by Reggie Black Plume and occasionally contained articles by Hugh Dempsey.


== Communities ==
The Kainai nation communities include:
Bullhorn
Fish Creek
Ft Whoop Up
Levern
Moses Lake
Old Agency
Standoff


== See also ==
List of Indian reserves in Alberta


== References ==


== External links ==
Blood Tribe Information Web* Kainai Studies - Post secondary educational entity dedicated to Blackfoot teachings
Introduction to photo essay from 'Nitsitapiisinni: Our Way of Life' museum exhibit
Concise description of the Blackfoot tribes
Pete Standing Alone Trilogy, National Film Board of Canada
Brief biography of former chief Roy Fox.
Kainai News (1968-1991)
Blackfoot Digital Library
Blood Tribe page at Treaty 7 Management Corporation website