Stand Up (Dave Matthews Band album)

Stand Up is the sixth studio album by Dave Matthews Band, released on May 10, 2005. It was produced by Mark Batson. It was their fourth consecutive number one album on the Billboard 200. The album was the last to feature full participation from the band's saxophonist, LeRoi Moore, who died during the early production stages of the following album Big Whiskey & the GrooGrux King.


== Background ==
In Fall 2004, DMB returned to their studio in Charlottesville, Virginia. Having decided they wanted to take some chances and pursue a funkier side to their music, A&R Bruce Flohr had tracked down a new producer in Mark Batson. According to Flohr in an interview with HitQuarters, "When the band and him got together it was instant creative karma. Things took off like a bat out of hell."


== Release and promotion ==
Prior to the album's release, Dave Matthews Band published a website showcasing video clips from the production of the album with commentary by producer Mark Batson.  Additionally, VH1 streamed the album in its entirety before the official release.
The album is offered in CD format, DualDisc format (one side CD, one side DVD-Video), and as a digital download from the band's website or iTunes Music Store.  This was the first album by the band released for sale through iTunes.
Buyers have expressed their disappointment that some versions of Stand Up contain an anti-piracy program meant to keep the CD from being ripped, as this program prevents the CD from being played in some types of players; resultingly, the band posted instructions on how to circumvent the restriction on their website. The album artwork that appears on this CD depicts the Fire Dancer logo that Dave Matthews drew himself. It was created in response to someone asking him to capture what he saw when he looked out at the crowd during live performances.


== Track listing ==
All songs by David J. Matthews and Mark Batson, except "Hello Again" by Matthews.


== Personnel ==
Dave Matthews Band

Carter Beauford – vocals, drums, percussion
Stefan Lessard – vocals, bass guitar
Dave Matthews – vocals, guitar, piano
LeRoi Moore – vocals, soprano saxophone, tenor saxophone
Boyd Tinsley – vocals, violin, electric violin, mandolinAdditional personnel

Mark Batson – vocals (7), piano (1, 2, 4, 6, 13), clavinet (10), organ (5, 6, 10, 13), Wurlitzer organ (12), Mellotron (7), keyboards (1, 3), Moog synthesizer (5, 14), synthesizer (11), percussion (7)
Butch Taylor – piano (1), Fender Rhodes piano (7, 11), Wurlitzer electric piano (2, 10), organ (7, 9, 14), keyboards (1), background vocals (12, 14)
Lee Grove – percussion (1)
Curtis Fuller – vocals, guitarOther credits

Mark Batson – producer, engineer
Coran Capshaw – management
Danny Clinch – photography
Alex Dromgal – mixing assistant (1, 3, 10, 13)
Dave Emery  – mixing assistant (1, 3, 10, 13)
Rob Evans – assistant, engineer (1, 5)
Bruce Flohr – A&R
Brian Gardner – mastering
Serban Ghenea – mixing (2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14)
John Hanes – digital editing, engineer
Wyndsor Taggart Hug – art direction, design
Patrick G. Jordan – project manager
Thane Kerner – art direction, design
Chris Kress – engineer
Mark "Spike" Stent – mixing (1, 3, 10, 13)
Lee Grove – additional programming
Tim Roberts – mixing assistant (2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14)


== Commercial performance ==


== References ==


== External links ==
DMB New Studio Album website