Universidade Católica de Petrópolis

The Catholic University of Petrópolis (Portuguese: Universidade Católica de Petrópolis, UCP) is a private and non-profit Catholic university in Petrópolis — the capital of the State of Rio de Janeiro for nine years and the largest city of the highlands of the state. It is maintained by the Catholic Archdiocese of Petrópolis.


== History ==

Created in 1953, the Catholic University of Petrópolis was the first institution of higher education in the city of Petrópolis. It began with the creation of civil society Petropolitana Catholic Colleges at the initiative of the then Diocesan Bishop Dom Manoel Pedro da Cunha Cintra. The first course offered by the new institution was law, installed in 1954 in a building in the Retiro district. In 1956, with the acquisition of the building where he worked for a long time, one of the finest hotels in the region, the Orleans Hotel, Barão do Amazonas Street, the schools of Philosophy, Sciences and Letters and, later, Industrial engineering were created.
In 1961, the merger of three colleges resulted in the founding of the Catholic University of Petrópolis. The institution was recognized by Decree 383 of December 20, 1961 and published in the Official Gazette on December 21, 1961. The university was formally installed on March 11, 1962 and then experienced a strong expansion with the opening of new courses. In the late '60s, the university purchased the School of Notre Dame de Sion, Benjamin Constant Street used its space for its administration and much of their students. In the new campus, the School of Application was founded; it aimed to provide training field and research for students of the School of Education.
In the early '70s, the institution became a postcard of the city with the opening of the Flower Clock in front of the set Dom Manoel Pedro da Cunha Cintra, Barão do Amazonas Street. The space created during the ceremonies commemorating the Sesquicentennial of Independence was later one of the main tourist attraction in the region. Around this time, the university has gone through major changes, emphasizing the acquisition of the first computer in 1974, with installation of the Data Processing Center and the inauguration of the Center for Physical Education in 1976. The '80s brought the conquest of the granting of UCP FM Radio and later, the Cultural Foundation Dom Manoel Pedro da Cunha Cintra.
The 1990s marked the recognition of the university for the whole community. Among the major projects that had the participation of the institution are the signature of an agreement between the university and the city to revitalize the historic center of Petrópolis and integration of the university to the project Petrópolis-Tecnópolis. Today the UCP, which in its more than 50 years has trained over 18,000 professionals in different fields, offering 36 undergraduate courses, including 8 technicians, post-graduate and master.


== Unities and courses ==


=== Undergraduate Degree ===


== Admission ==
For undergraduate admission to UCP two exams are used: ENEM and its own vestibular test. 


== References ==


== External links ==
(in Portuguese) Official website