University Centre Peterborough

University Centre Peterborough is a small higher education institution located in Peterborough in the United Kingdom. It is formally part of Peterborough Regional College with degrees awarded by Anglia Ruskin University. The centre was opened in 2009, with the long-term aim to be the seed for a new university in the city.


== History ==
Since the 1990s, Loughborough University operated a satellite higher education campus in Peterborough. However, this closed in 2003, leaving the city as one of the largest urban areas in the country without a dedicated provision of higher education.
At around this time, Peterborough Regional College (a local further education college) was offering a limited range of higher education diplomas and degrees in conjunction with Anglia Ruskin University. In 2006, the two institutions began talks on developing a new university campus for the city. The plans moved a step closer when the college and the university officially completed the legal contracts for the creation of a new joint venture company in 2007 at a special signing ceremony at the college. The formation marked the culmination of legal negotiations and securing of funds required in order to build the new higher education centre. The joint venture company, limited by guarantee, is managed by an equal number of directors from both partner institutions who are responsible for the academic and operational running of the new centre.The University Centre Peterborough formally opened in October 2009 with 850 students. The centre is housed in a dedicated building which is situated opposite the main campus of Peterborough Regional College. Most of the higher education courses previously offered by the college are now located within the University Centre. The new University Centre Peterborough is also located close to the Thomas Deacon Academy, creating a new 'education quarter' in Peterborough.


== Today ==
Facilities at University Centre Peterborough include a lecture theatre, three IT laboratories, open access IT suites and general-purpose teaching accommodation with audio-visual and IT facilities. The centre also has refreshment areas and a student support centre, which includes a Student Union space.
All courses offered by the university centre are validated by Anglia Ruskin University and include HNCs, HNDs and BA honours degrees. The centre also offers a number of post-graduate courses, as well as qualifications from the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development.


== See also ==
University Centre Hastings
University Centre Milton Keynes


== References ==


== External links ==
University Centre Peterborough