Trust (Elvis Costello album)

Trust is an album by Elvis Costello and the Attractions. It is Costello's fifth album, and fourth with the Attractions. It was also his fifth consecutive album produced by Nick Lowe, who handled production on all songs except "Big Sister's Clothes" (which the liner notes make clear by stating that Lowe was "not to blame" for it).


== Background ==
Costello's original intent with Trust was to cross the melody of Armed Forces with the rhythm of Get Happy!! The songs on the album dealt with a general sense of disenchantment he felt during the time, with the recent election of the Conservative government as well as tensions within his first marriage, which gave them an overall cynical tone. As a result, the general lyrical content of the songs describe a world that is essentially the opposite of what the album title implies. Earlier working titles were "Cats and Dogs" and "More Songs About Fucking and Fighting".
The initial recording sessions were held at DJM Studios in London, but they were displeased with the results. It did not help that the bandmates were almost constantly under the influence of mood-altering drugs. As Costello wrote in the liner notes of the Rhino reissue:

Recording resumed at Eden Studios, where previous albums had been done. Although the band was no more sober, the resulting tracks were more to Costello's liking. Despite having previously expressed a desire to distance himself from the pop music mainstream, Costello revealed that a number of songs on the album were influenced by other contemporary artists. Specifically, "Clubland" incorporated the guitar style of the Police, "You'll Never Be A Man" borrowed from the Pretenders, "White Knuckles" was modelled on XTC records, and "Fish 'n' Chip Paper" was an homage to Squeeze. Lastly, "Big Sister's Clothes" had a bass line based on work by the Clash.According to AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine, Trust was conceived as "a stylistic tour de force", with examples of diverse styles on the record being the Bo Diddley beat on "Lovers' Walk", the jazz elements to "Clubland", the soul pop of "Watch Your Step", the "rockabilly redux" of "Luxembourg", the Tin Pan Alley-style pop of "Shot with His Own Gun", the country-styled "Different Finger" and the "more complex arrangements and musicianship" that accompany "White Knuckles" and "New Lace Sleeves".Commercially, none of the singles on Trust entered the British top 40, the first time this had happened since My Aim Is True, his debut album.  "Clubland" was a minor chart hit at # 60.


== Critical reception ==
Contemporary reviews for Trust were positive. In a 4/5 star review for Rolling Stone, Ken Tucker wrote "from the Elvis Presley-style echoes of "Luxembourg" to the duet that Costello sings with Squeeze's Glenn Tilbrook. In "From a Whisper to a Scream," Costello's sour croon and Tilbrook's sweet moan swoop and dive around each other in joyous comradeship". Rolling Stone later revised the album, giving it a 5 star rating. It was ranked at #7 among the top ten "Albums of the Year" for 1981 by NME. Robert Christgau of the Village Voice gave it an A, and wrote "this is rock and roll as eloquent, hard-hitting pop, and Elvis has turned into such a soul man that I no longer wish he'd change his name to George and go country".Retrospectively, Trust has received acclaim from music critics, and has been often cited as one of Costello's best, as well as most underrated works. Stephen Thomas Erlewine, writing for AllMusic, rated it 5/5 stars and called it "arguably, their most impressive album, one that demonstrates all sides of Costello's songwriting and performing personality without succumbing to pretentiousness". On the 30th anniversary of the album's release, Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone named it Costello's best album, writing "it's never been one of his most famous albums, but it's his funniest, his wisest, and his most rocking."  Speaking of the album, Costello said "That's a record that falls between the cracks a little bit" and I think it has one of the greatest Attractions performances, 'New Lace Sleeves.'"


== In popular culture ==
The album is mentioned in Bret Easton Ellis' novel Less Than Zero, which also takes its name from one of Costello's songs.


== LP track listing ==
All songs written by Elvis Costello except as indicated.


=== Side one ===
"Clubland" – 3:42
"Lover's Walk" – 2:17
"You'll Never Be a Man" – 2:56
"Pretty Words" – 3:11
"Strict Time" – 2:40
"Luxembourg" – 2:26
"Watch Your Step" – 2:57


=== Side two ===
"New Lace Sleeves" – 3:45
"From a Whisper to a Scream" – 2:54
"Different Finger" – 1:58
"White Knuckles" – 3:47
"Shot with His Own Gun" – 3:30
"Fish 'n' Chip Paper" – 2:55
"Big Sister's Clothes" – 2:11


=== CD reissue bonus tracks (1994 Rykodisc) ===
"Black Sails in the Sunset" [Alternate Mix] – 2:56
"Big Sister" – 2:11
"Sad About Girls" (Steve Nieve as "Norman Brain", Fay Hart) – 2:48
"Twenty-Five to Twelve" – 3:52
"Love for Sale" (Cole Porter) – 3:02
"Weeper's Dream" – 1:05
"Gloomy Sunday" (Sam M. Lewis, Rezső Seress) – 3:13
"Boy with a Problem" (solo demo version) (Costello, Chris Difford) – 2:31
"Seconds of Pleasure" (Version 1 of 'Invisible Man') – 3:18"Black Sails in the Sunset" is presented here in a previously unreleased alternate mix that runs 13 seconds shorter and fades out earlier than the original b-side version.


=== Bonus disc (2003 Rhino) ===

"Black Sails in the Sunset" – 3:09
"Big Sister" – 2:17
"Twenty-Five to Twelve" – 4:05
"Sad About Girls" (Brain, Hart) – 2:49
"From a Whisper to a Scream" (Alternate version) – 3:27
"Watch Your Step" (Alternate version) – 2:47
"Clubland" (Alternate take) – 4:03
"You'll Never be a Man" (Alternate take) – 3:10
"Slow Down" (Larry Williams) – 2:24
"Big Sister" (Alternate version) – 5:07
"Black Sails in the Sunset" (Alternate version) – 3:07
"Hoover Factory" (Alternate version) – 1:47
"Love for Sale" (Porter) – 3:04
"Boy with a Problem" (Single version) (Costello, Difford) – 2:33
"Weeper's Dream" – 1:07
"Gloomy Sunday" (Lewis, Seress) – 3:15
"The Long Honeymoon" (Instrumental piano demo) – 1:41The Rykodisc version has the original tracks and bonus tracks on one CD. The Rhino version has two CDs with the original tracks on the first CD.


== Personnel ==
Elvis Costello – vocals, guitars, all instruments on "Big Sister's Clothes"The AttractionsSteve Nieve – piano, organ
Bruce Thomas – bass
Pete Thomas – drumsAdditional personnelGlenn Tilbrook – vocal on "From a Whisper to a Scream"
Martin Belmont – guitar on "From a Whisper to a Scream"
Billy Bremner – guitar on "From a Whisper to a Scream"TechnicalNeill King - production assistance
Greg Allen - art direction, design
Keith Morris, Paul Cox - photography


== Charts ==
Album


== References ==