Black Shadow (Transformers)

This is a list of characters from the 1989 anime series Transformers: Victory.


== Autobots (Cybertrons) ==


=== Brainmasters ===
Brainmasters were Transformers who came with an individual partner, who when combined formed the host's face.

Star Saber - Cybertronian Super-Jet: The main protagonist of the series who is armed with his Saberblade.
Blacker - Assault Buggy
Laster - Lamborghini Countach
Braver - Ferrari F40
Road Caesar - Combined Form of Blacker, Braver and Laster


=== Multiforce ===
The Multiforce consisted of six Autobots who could combine with each other as well as one entire entity. This technology is similar to the powerlinking process seen in Transformers: Energon and the Brave Saga 2 brothers Magna and Flash. The following were the most common combinations used in the series. All the members of Multiforce can combine with any other member of Multiforce to form a larger robot, but Tackle most commonly combines with Mach to form Machtackle. All the Multiforce members can combine into Landcross. With their new stealth modes the members of Multiforce can become invisible.
Wingwaver
Wing - Wing is the leader of the Autobot Multiforce team and turns into a jet. Wing's power is represented in with the wind, which he can manipulate. He can rain grenades on his opponents and is very stealthy. As a member of the Multiforce, Wing can transform and merge with any of his fellow members. All the members of Multiforce can combine with any other member of Multiforce to form a larger robot, but Wing most commonly combines with Waver to form Wingwaver.
Waver - Sea Skimmer - Waver is part of the Autobot Multiforce. Waver is the deputy leader of the Multiforce and helps Wing with his knowledge and kindness. Waver is the second in command of the Multiforce and therefor Wing's most trusted friend. What Wing lacks in experience, Waver supplies. Waver is always there to give Wing the support the other members of the Multiforce don't provide. He trusts his leader but also knows when to take charge. He knows what needs to be done in a situation but lacks leadership skills. He is very quiet and reserved, only speaking out when he has something worth saying. Waver loves children, and during his free time, he goes cruising on the lake, giving rides to them. His abundant knowledge proves most useful in his role as Wing's adviser. As he was the central figure in the stealth experiments, he feels responsible for the current accident.
Dashtacker
Dash - Sports Car
Tacker - Military Transport Vehicle
Machtackle
Mach -  Mach is part of the Autobot Multiforce. Mach is incredibly quick, able to reach a speed of Mach 3 almost instantly, and capable of higher speeds given time. His power represents the moon. All the members of Multiforce can combine with any other member of Multiforce to form a larger robot, but Mach most commonly combines with Tackle to form Machtackle.Tackle - Pickup Truck - Tackle’s vehicle mode is that of a Jeep, equipping him for nearly any type of terrain. As a member of the Multiforce, Tackle can transform and merge with any of his fellow members. His partner, however, is Mach. Tackle’s power represents the Earth. All the members of Multiforce can combine with any other member of Multiforce to form a larger robot, but Tackle most commonly combines with Mach to form Machtackle.Landcross - Multiforce Combined Form


=== Micromasters ===
Rescue Patrol
Holi (Stakeout) - Police Car
Pipo (Fixit) - Ambulance
Boater (Seawatch) - Police Boat
Fire (Red Hot) - Fire Engine
Clipper - Sports Car -Holi/Stakeout's girlfriend who stayed on Planet Micro while he joined Star Saber's forces.


=== Humans ===
Jan Minakaze - a human boy
Illumina "Lumina" Hoshi - a little girl in Jan's school and his crush
Clump - a tough boy in Jan's school
Joyce - a slightly snooty girl in Jan's school
Rami - a presumably peppy girl in Jan's school


=== Sixchanger ===
Greatshot - Assault Tank, Jet, Rhino, Armored Car, Assault Gun
Greatshot was a retooling of the U.S. figure Sixshot


=== Other ===
Perceptor - Microscope - Perceptor is a renowned Cybertronian scientist. He craves knowledge. His discoveries have helped his allies on many occasions. His specialties lie in metallurgy, electrical engineering, and other sciences closely related to Transformer physiology though his intelligence has made him reliable in many fields. Though he is an awful bore, but all the Autobots estimate and like him because of his good nature. He is always ready to help and to save everybody (even Megatron himself) whose life is in danger. According to the voice actor Paul Eiding, Perceptor was voiced with inspiration from C-3PO and The Absent-Minded Professor with a British accent. Perceptor was named the oddest thing that G1 Transformers transform into by Topless Robot.
Wheeljack - Lancia Stratos - It was revealed on Ask Vector Prime that he is Binaltech universe Wheeljack.
Minerva - Porsche Ambulance
Victory Leo - Lion - Victory Leo is the rebuilt version of Ginrai. As Deszaras goes to deliver a fatal blow to Star Saber with his cannon God Ginrai arrives to block the blast. All the  combatants are injured in the fighting and with the arrival of Braver and Laster the Decepticons flee. God Ginrai's wounds are severe and he collapses. "A Deadly Battle". Transformers: Victory. Season 1. Episode 25 (in Japanese). His body utterly shattered, even Autobot scientists Perceptor and Wheeljack were unable to restore his mobility. Learning of a new conversion process conceived of by Star Saber, Ginrai insisted that he be subjected to it, even when Star Saber attempted to stop him - the process would completely transform Ginrai into a new form that could be used by Star Saber as a power up, and the commander refused to use Ginrai's body in so base a manner. Ginrai persisted, and the Autobots relented; Perceptor and Wheeljack initiated the process, and God Ginrai's body was completely reconfigured into the new form of the lion-bot, Victory Leo.
Galaxy Shuttle (Orion) - Space Shuttle


== Decepticons (Destrons) ==


=== Breast Force ===
The Breast Force (or BrestForce as noted on the packaging of the associated toys) is the name given to an elite force of Decepticon from the Japanese exclusive Transformers series Transformers: Victory. They are alternatively known as the Beast Force or Chest Force, the later being their name in the Shout! Factory subtitled DVD release. The reason for the name Breast Force is their toy gimmick. Each Breast Forcer came with a detachable breastplate that transformed into an animal attack partner which could also transform into a weapon. What animal each Breast Force member came with was hinted at in the name (for example, Leozack came with a lion, while Gaihawk had a hawk. Deathcobra's presumably transformed into a cobra).The Breast Force was named one of the top Unfortunately Named Transformers.Liokaiser is by far the most powerful Decepticon combiner in the Transformers series utilizing the abilities of all 6 members in air and land combat.  He has the ability to turn invisible which allowed him to gain an advantage in his battles with Starsaber and Landcross in one episode. His preferred weapon to use in combat is the spear which he could release deadly spikes that can cut through any Autobot armor or convert it into a chain to ensnare his opponent. He is a cold and ruthless killing machine who shows no mercy in battle.  Upon his first appearance the battle turned towards the Decepticon's favor as no Autobot warrior was able to defeat him.  He has only been stopped from finishing Star Saber on several occasions due to the intervention of God Ginrai and the orders of Deszaras. Only Victory Leo could be considered his equal in battle in terms of ferocity and tenacity.
Deszaras - Bird-monster - The main antagonist of the series and current Decepticon Emperor. He is also referred to as Deathsaurus (A butchered Americanisation of his official Japanese name) as well as being called Deszanras in the Omni Productions English dub. Deszaras is a fairly large Transformer, being roughly the same size as Battle Mode Star Saber and the various Combiners.
Eagle Breast - Deszaras' primary Beast, who transforms into a massive bow for Deszaras to use in battle.
Tiger Breast - Deszaras' secondary Beast, who often appears separate from his master aboard the ship Thunder Arrow.
Liokaiser - Breast Force Combiner
Leozack - F-14 Tomcat
Lion Breast
Drillhorn - Drill Tank
Rhino Breast
Killbison - Gepard Air Defence Tank
Bison Breast
Jaruga/Jallgar - Missile Buggy
Jaguar Breast
Hellbat - JAS 39 Gripen
Bat Breast
Gaihawk - MiG-29 Fulcrum
Hawk Breast
Deathcobra - Attack Helicopter - Only appeared in one episode and died in the same episode too.
Cobra BreastBreast Force members:

Leozack: He transforms into a green-and-grey fighter jet. His breastplate transforms into a miniature mechanical lion. He is the first member of the Breast Force to appear. He functions as Decepticon Emperor Deszaras' right-hand man and is much more competent than the bumbling leader of the Dinoforce.
Jaguar: He transforms into a black-colored missile buggy. His breastplate transforms into a miniature mechanical jaguar. He is the stealth warrior. His specialty is ambushing his victims. Jaguar's kana differs from the kana of the previous Cassettron known as Jaguar (the Decepticon cassette known as Ravage in the English versions of Transformers), indicating that the Jaguar of Breast Force is to be pronounced as the common British pronunciation of Jaguar, while the cassette is pronounced as the American pronunciation.
Killbison: He transforms into a gold-colored double-barrelled tank. His breastplate transforms into a miniature rampaging mechanical bison. He is the most bloodthirsty and least intelligent of the group.
Drillhorn: He transforms into a purple-colored drill tank. His breastplate transforms into a miniature rampaging mechanical rhino. He is the strategist of the Breast Force. Like other Decepticon strategists before him, he occasionally loses sight of the little things in favor of the big picture.
Hellbat: He transforms into a dark blue jet fighter. His breastplate transforms into a miniature mechanical bat. He is very dangerous due to his unique talent where he hypnotizes his victims. A schemer and easily the most cowardly of the group.
Gaihawk: He transforms into a bright red fighter jet. His breastplate transforms into a miniature mechanical falcon. He was later freed by his Breast Force comrades and proceeded to massacre his guards. A violent Decepticon, he spent many episodes of Victory imprisoned. He was later freed by his Breast Force comrades and proceeded to massacre his guards.
Liokaiser: The combined form of the previous six Breast Force members. Leozack forms the head and main body, Gaihawk and Hellbat form the arms, Jaguar forms the lower torso, Killbison and Drillhorn form the legs.
Deszaras: The Decepticon Emperor in Victory was also considered part of the Breast Force subgroup. Unlike his subordinates, however, Deszaras had two partners, Tiger Breast and Eagle Breast. Wired Magazine once nominated him as one 12 most ridiculous Transformers of all time.
Deathcobra: He is an unfortunate Decepticon who only appeared in one episode. Despite having never been designed in toy form, Deathcobra's single appearance has garnered a somewhat notable fan following. This may be due to the integrity Deathcobra showed in his brief appearance, as well as the grief the Breast Force showed when they came upon his body. His death was directly responsible for the first combination of Liokaiser.


==== Animated series ====
When Star Saber arrived shortly after Hellbat slew Deathcobra, Leozack furiously ordered the team to unleash their secret weapon: their combined form Liokaiser. Liokaiser nearly killed Star Saber, but the arrival of God Ginrai was just barely enough to force the combiner to retreat.The Breast Force appeared in episode #4, "Unite!! Multiforce" The latest Breast Force warriors—Jaguar (Transformers), Drillhorn and Killbison—along with Leozack and the Dinoforce made plans to attack an energy complex. Meanwhile, Jan got a physics lesson from the Multiforce about fulcrums. Suddenly, at the plant, the Decepticons struck from the air and the sea with the Dinoforce while the Breast Force members hid in the sand in ambush. The Multiforce spotted the destruction from afar and battled the Dinoforce on even terms until they formed Dinoking. Jan informed the other Autobots that there was danger and Star Saber and the Brainmasters headed out to investigate. Just as things looked bad, the Multiforce merged to form Landcross to do battle with Dinoking. Star Saber arrived to help Landcross take on Dinoking while the Brainmasters battled Killbison and Jaguar, driving away the Decepticons.Shortly after rescuing Gaihawk, Leozack reveals to the other Breast Force members (save Hellbat) that he plans to replace the untrustworthy Hellbat with Deathcobra. Leozack mentions that he and Deathcobra had worked together in the past, and that the new arrival would be a much more reliable teammate than Hellbat. Hellbat (having spied on the others and learned of the plan) attempts to convince Deathcobra to go away. Unluckily for him Deathcobra bluntly refuses, determined to keep his word and meet with his old friend Leozack. Following an altercation, Hellbat accidentally kills Deathcobra and frames the Autobots.In episode #23, "Fight to the Death!! Antarctic Battle", the Breast Force drains energy from the Antarctic, melting the polar ice. The Multiforce aid people trapped in a flood in South America when Star Saber orders them to meet him at a United Nations research base in the Antarctic.  Wing and Mach arrive first and are confronted by Liokaiser. Waver tows in the rest of Multiforce by sea and despite forming Landcross they are outclassed by Liokaiser’s ability to turn invisible. Star Saber and Galaxy Shuttle arrive to help in the fight as Jan, Stakeout and Seawatch help evacuate the human scientists from the U.N. base. Liokaiser continues to best the Autobots in battle thanks to his ability to turn invisible, but as the Decepticon gestalt is about to finish off Victory Saber, Deszaras steps in and insists that he have a hand in the demise of his enemy. Star Saber takes the opportunity to take the battle to the air, matching Deszaras’ deadly wings with his skill. Galaxy Shuttle takes out the Decepticon energy collector with an energy blast and the Decepticons retreat in the Thunder Arrow. The humans scientists thank the Autobots for their help.The Breast Force appeared in episode #24 "Crisis! Ambush in the Desert." Greatshot patrolled the galaxy for Decepticons and came to Earth where he spotted the Thunder Arrow. The Dinoforce attacked an oil field in Saudi Arabia for its energy. Star Saber sent the Brainmasters and Micromaster Rescue Patrol in Galaxy Shuttle. When the Autobots arrived they were ambushed by the Breast Force. Braver and Laster found it difficult to maneuver in the desert sand. The Rescue Patrol freed the human prisoners from Kakuryu. The Brainmasters formed Road Caesar, but it didn't help. Greatshot came to the rescue as Star Saber called for help. Deathsaurus arrived to take his anger out on Greatshot. Blacker injured himself saving Greatshot from an attack. Star Saber and Greatshot took on Deathsaurus and the Breast Force. Fixit did field repairs on Blacker. The Breast Force retreated when they became too injured to combine. Star Saber damaged the Thunder Arrow and Deszaras retreated. Braver and Laster blew up Dinoforce's energon cube stockpile and the last of the Decepticons retreated.In episode #25 "A Deadly Battle" Blacker recovers at the Autobot Shuttle Base under the care of the Rescue Patrol. God Ginrai contacts Star Saber from space wanting to know about Blacker's injuries and offering to help if the Autobots on Earth need him. In the Thunder Arrow the Decepticons plan their next mission, with member of Breast Force wanting revenge on Greatshot and Deathsaurus closely watching Leozack. The Breast Force are sent to attack an Autobot garrison in Asia. Star Saber receives an SOS from the garrison orders the Brainmasters to remain at the base as he, the Rescue Patrol and Galaxy Shuttle respond. Blacker suspects the Autobot left without him and finds it shameful. The Breast Force focus their attacks on Star Saber and get the best of him. Blacker orders Braver and Laster to join in the fight, leaving him to protect the Shuttle Base. Liokaiser leads Star Saber into a trap where Deszaras is waiting. Realizing Star Saber is in danger Jan and Stakeout send an SOS, hoping Greatshot will answer. As Deszaras goes to deliver a fatal blow to Star Saber with his cannon God Ginrai arrives to block the blast. All the  combatants are injured in the fighting and with the arrival of Braver and Laster the Decepticons flee. God Ginrai's wounds are severe and he collapses.Liokaiser continued to be a major threat to the Autobots until he met his match in Victory Saber. In the final battle, he met his demise when he was hurled by Victory Leo into a huge energy cannon and blasted into deep space.


==== Toys ====
Generation 1 LiokaiserThe toy Liokaiser is notable for removing one of the major flaws of his predecessors: the ease with which a vital part (such as a foot or hand) could be lost. With the Breast Force, however, each part was incorporated into the design of the Transformer (for example, by simply flipping out a certain panel on both Killbison and Drillhorn, they would form Liokaiser's legs complete with feet). The only separate component was Liokaiser's head.  His rifle is made from Killbison's turret and Jaguar's missiles. This toy was designed by Takara's Takashi Kunihiro.Combiner Wars Platinum Edition Liokaiser (2016)An Entertainment Earth exclusive set that uses several repainted/remolded Combiner Wars figures to create a new set in tribute to Liokaiser. Leozack and Jaruga are replaced as torso components by Dezarus, a repaint of Combiner Wars Sky Lynx that incorporates Leozack's coloration with Deszaras' and also features a feline Combiner head resembling Jaruga's. Drillhorn and Ironbison (formerly Killbison) are both remolded from Combiner Wars Brawl, while Fellbat (Hellbat) is a remold of Firefly and Guyhawk is a remold of Air Raid. The set also comes with a new figure, Ion Scythe, a bird that transforms into a gun for the Combiner and is presumed to be an homage to Deszaras' Eagle Breast.


=== Dinoforce ===
The Dinoforce are recolors of the Monster Pretenders figures with dinosaur-themed Pretender shells, who emerge from those shells in order to battle and to combine into Dinoking, a recolor of Monstructor. The exception is Goryu, the group's leader, who always appears outside of his Tyrannosaurus shell either riding it or independent of it. The Dinoforce serves as the dumb muscle for Deathsaurus' forces, and are usually defeated with relative ease by the Autobots they face off with.

Goryu - Tyrannosaurus
Rairyu - Brontosaurus
Gairyu - Ankylosaurus
Doryu - Stegosaurus
Kakuryu - Triceratops
Yokuryu - Pterodactyl
Dinoking - Dinoforce Gestalt


=== Crossformers ===
A pair of Decepticon mercenaries and former comrades of Greatshot who are hired by Hellbat to attack Planet Micro; they appear in only one episode.

Black Shadow - Spaceship / Interceptor - also called Sky Shadow.
Black Shadow was a retooling of US figure Thunderwing
Blue Bacchus - Helicopter / Dragster
Blue Bacchus was a retooling of US figure Crossblades


== References ==