Habrough railway station

Habrough railway station serves the village of Habrough and the town of Immingham in North East Lincolnshire, England. It was built by the Great Grimsby and Sheffield Junction Railway in 1848. Up until 1988 there was a signal box at the station on the south side of the track and east side of the road with manually-operated gates. It was of typical Great Central Railway signal box design. The main buildings were located on the eastbound platform and were linked to the westbound one via a footbridge, but both have also been demolished and the crossing is now automatic.The station is managed by Northern, and is also served by East Midlands Railway and TransPennine Express services.


== Facilities ==
The station is unstaffed and has no ticketing provision, so passengers must buy their tickets in advance or on the train. Other than waiting shelters on each platform, the only amenities provided are a public phone box on platform 1 and timetable information poster boards. Step-free access to both sides is available via the level crossing (the platforms are staggered either side of the crossing).


== Services ==
Regular services to Grimsby Town eastbound and westbound towards Barton-on-Humber, Newark North Gate (East Midlands Railway) and Doncaster and Manchester Airport (TransPennine Express). Trains run every two hours on each of the three routes on weekdays, but the Barton and Lincoln line services only operate on Sundays in the summer months.  The Saturdays-only Northern service to/from Sheffield via Brigg also calls here (3 trains each way).Habrough's railway station is a boundary station for North Lincolnshire and North East Lincolnshire areas. There is no direct passenger service between Barnetby and Ulceby.
From December 2019, the TransPennine Express service between Cleethorpes and Manchester Airport will go hourly.


== Rrferences ==


== External links ==
Train times and station information for Habrough railway station from National Rail