Cardinal Carter Catholic High School

Cardinal Carter Catholic High School, often shortened to Cardinal Carter, is a International Baccalaureate high school in Aurora, Ontario, Canada in the York Catholic District School Board. The school principal is Frances Fraser. The vice principals are Nicholas Galatianos, Derek Chan, and Christian Scenna. The IB coordinator is Derek Chan.
Cardinal Carter was established in 1989, commencing operation for grades eight and nine at Our Lady of the Annunciation elementary school. Once construction of the school was completed, service boundaries were defined by the school board to alleviate overcrowding of other Roman Catholic schools in the region, notably St. Robert and St. Elizabeth high schools in Thornhill, and Sacred Heart Catholic High School in Newmarket. It takes its name after Cardinal Gerald Emmett Carter, former Archbishop of Toronto. It is also sometimes confused with Cardinal Carter Academy for the Arts. 
The school is located on a private campus directly across the street from the York Catholic District School Board. It has numerous elementary feeder schools within its service boundaries:

Aurora: Holy Spirit Catholic Elementary School, Light of Christ Catholic Elementary School, Our Lady of Grace Catholic Elementary School, St. Joseph Catholic Elementary School
King City: Holy Name Catholic Elementary School
Oak Ridges: Our Lady of Hope Catholic Elementary School, Our Lady of the Annunciation Catholic Elementary School, Father Frederick McGinn Catholic Elementary School
Maple: St. David Catholic Elementary School, Divine Mercy Catholic Elementary School, Holy Jubilee Catholic Elementary School, St. James Catholic Elementary School
Nobleton: St. Mary Catholic Elementary School
Schomberg: St. Patrick Catholic Elementary School


== Notable alumni ==
James Tuck, Canadian football player
Dakota Goyo, actor
Alex Formenton, Professional hockey player


== See also ==
List of high schools in Ontario


== References ==


== External links ==
Cardinal Carter Catholic High School website
School Council website