Movement for Changes

Movement for Changes (Montenegrin: Покрет за промјене, Pokret za promjene, or PzP) is a liberal-conservative, populist political party in Montenegro that has as a proclaimed goal the integration of their country into the European Union and political and economic reforms to bring it into line with European norms. It was founded by a group of economists and academics in September 2002 and was modeled after the Group 17 Plus in Serbia. It is led by Nebojša Medojević It operated as a non-governmental organization under the name Group for Changes (Grupa za promjene) until July 17, 2006, when it reconstituted itself as a political party.


== Ideology ==
The ideological profile of the Movement for Changes is a mix of fiscal conservatism and liberalism in economic policy, atlanticism and Souverainism in foreign policy, and moderate conservatism on social issues. While PzP has been a vocal advocate for Montenegro's NATO membership, it takes a cautiously supportive attitude towards the country's EU integrations, opposing the European Union's further federalisation and frequently criticising the Brussels bureaucracy. In recent years, the Movement for Changes has increasingly employed a populist discourse, frequently depicting the Montenegrin society as fundamentally divided between ordinary citizens and a corrupt partocracy. The party, like its NGO predecessor, advocates as part a reform agenda change in the "undemocratic regime of the Democratic Party of Socialists" the party that has ruled Montenegro as the dominant partner in every coalition government since the end of communism, and the "dethroning" of multiple-term Prime-Minister and President Milo Đukanović.
In recent years, PzP have been significantly changed its public appearance, with frequent right-wing populist, eurosceptic, anti-immigration, islamophobic and homophobic public statements of their high-ranked members. The party leader Medojević publicly endorsed Donald Trump's candidacy in the 2016 election, as well as political actions of Italian far-right politician Matteo Salvini during the migrant crisis.


== History ==
In the 2006 Montenegrin independence referendum, PzP remained neutral and did not campaign for either option, their choice being an outcome without the Movement's involvement. Although prominent members of the party supported an independent Montenegrin state, they refused to join the Bloc for an Independent Montenegro, led by the DPS. After the referendum, they stated that they did so out of opposition to Đukanović's rule, which they see as corrupt and undemocratic. This is, however, a matter of controversy, as the Movement has maintained close ties with the Together for Change Serbian-unionist bloc.In the 2006 parliamentary election, the party ran for the first time, winning 11 of 81 seats. It became a vocal opposition party and forged links with the Serb People's Party and the Socialist People's Party of Montenegro in an attempt to unify the country's political opposition.
The party put forward amendments as part of the drafting process for the new Constitution of Montenegro, including the suggestion of official language status for the Serbian language alongside the existing proposal to declare Montenegrin the state language. The proposal was adopted by the ruling coalition, and PzP gave its support for the required two-thirds super-majority to adopt the Constitution. This support damaged its ties with other opposition parties to some extent. The presence of senior officials of Movement for Changes at protests against Montenegrin recognition of Kosovo, in turn, alienated some Albanian supporters of the Movement.
The party saw a fall in support at the 2009 parliamentary election, falling from 11 seats to 5.
The Movement for Changes leader, Nebojša Medojević, was a candidate in the 2008 presidential election. He came in third, gathering nearly 17% of the vote.
PzP joined the Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists in May 2015. In 2019, following Nebojsa Medojevic's meeting with Mischaël Modrikamen PzP announced its membership in The Movement, a coalition of populist parties chaired by former White House Chief Strategist Steve Bannon.


== Elections ==


=== Parliamentary elections ===


=== Presidential elections ===


== See also ==
Democratic Front
Anti-government protests in Montenegro (October 2015)
Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists


== Footnotes ==


== External links ==
Official Website (in Serbo-Croatian, with some English content)