Gandhi Nagar, Sindhanur

Gandhi Nagar formerly known as Jalihal Camp, is one of the largest villages in Karnataka state in terms of area, population, property, agricultural production and revenue.  It is the first government recognized revenue village in the Tunga Bhadra Delta Region (i.e. Bellary, Raichur and Koppal districts).  From 17 May 1997 onward this village was renamed Gandhi Nagar from Jalihal Camp. is located on either sides of Tunga bhadra left Bank Canal,#36.In this village you will find lots of paddy fields which are highly fertile & higher yielding type. Paddy is the main agricultural crop in the Tunga Bhadra Delta Region and the paddy varieties grown here include Sonamasuri, Emergency, Ganga Kaveri, Nellore Sona, JJL, RS22.
The paddy grown here were mainly exported to Bangalore, Chennai, Maharashtra and Middle-East countries.  The paddy cultivation is done by using modern agricultural equipment; in this village most of the farmers have their own tractor.
In this village you will also find large masses of Telugu-speaking people, who are mainly migrated from West Godhavari District of Andhra Pradesh during 1960–1970s for cultivating agricultural land in Tunga Bhadra Delta Region.  These people are mainly of Kamma and Rajulu Community and their primary occupation is agriculture and animal husbandry. Telugu constitute the majority of the villagers and farmers.
There are no communal tensions and people of all castes and creeds coexist in harmony. This village perfectly suits its name "GANDHI"NAGAR as all the people in this village follow Gandhian principles.
Kamma people also known as chowdaries form the base of Gandhinagar's economy.
The people in this village mainly established cow and buffalo farms alongside the paddy fields.


== Famous places ==
Gandhi Nagar(R) has lot of temples to visit and among these "Lord Shiva Temple" is a must visit temple because of its architectural design.This is one of the finest temples you will find in Tungabhadra Delta region.This Great Temple is built from funds donated by people of Gandhi Nagar & neighboring villages & towns.  Telugu Film Actors Muralimohan, Srikanth and Aahuthi Prasad are also contributed funds for building this "Great Shivalayam" Temple.  The main persons who involved in all activities for successful construction of Temple are the great Veerampalam Siddanthi "sree sree Garimella venkataramana Swamji" and Sri Maddhipati Gangadhar Rao of Gandhi Nagar(R). To build this "Great Shivalayam" it cost approximately 100 million rupees.  Every weekend thousands of visitors come to this temple.
The following is the list of temples which are located in Gandhi Nagar(R)
1. Shivalayam (Annapoorna Vishalakshi sametha vishveshwara panchayathana kshethram,12-Jyothirlingas)
2. Shiridi Sai Baba Temples(2) 
3. Ramalayam Temple
4. Subbramanyam Swami Temple
5. Lord Vinayaka Temple
6. Lord Anjaneya Temple
7. Durgamma Temple
8. Thayamma Temple
9. Sri Renuka Yallamma temple
10.Sri Grama devi temple


== Education ==
The following are schools located in Gandhi Nagar(R):
1. Tagore Telugu Medium School high school(TTM)
2. Sarvepalli RadhaKrishna Education Trust's Vishvashanthi Vidhyanikethan
3. Govt Kannada Medium School
4. Monalisa English Medium School
5. Sri Manjunath school
6. Shree Gurusiddeshwar High School


== Hospitals ==
Government Hospital
Medi Clinics


== Geography ==
Gandhi Nagar(R) is located at 15°41′49″N 76°39′53″E. It lies on the banks of Tunga Bhadra Left Bank Canal, #36 and the nearest town is Sindhanur, a distance of 12 km.  Its Taluk headquarters is Sindhanur and District headquarters in Raichur.


== Gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		


== See also ==
Sindhanur
Raichur
Karnataka


== References ==