The Human Jungle (film)

The Human Jungle is a 1954 film noir crime film directed by Joseph M. Newman and starring Gary Merrill and Jan Sterling.


== Plot ==
Under pressure to clean up crime in the streets, Abe Rowan, chief of police, assigns Capt. "Danny" Danforth to take charge and restore order. Danforth assures wife Pat the dangerous assignment is strictly temporary, determined to get out of police work for good.
A murder of a striptease dancer becomes Danforth's top priority. He and second-in-command Detective Geddes cast their suspicions toward hoodlum Earl Swados, attempting to persuade another stripper, Mary Abbott, to turn state's evidence against him. After charging her with prostitution, the cops spread the word that Mary is going to inform on Swados and the local crime boss, Leonard Ustick.
Complications arise when another detective, Strauss, shoots an innocent bystander and police are falsely accused of beating three young men, causing neighborhood tensions to rise. Danforth takes a chance by releasing Mary, who had no intention of double-crossing the gangsters. Swados tries to murder her, chasing Mary through a brewery before Danforth and Geddes come to her rescue. Danforth resolves to stay on the job, no matter how long it takes.


== Cast ==
Gary Merrill as Police Capt. John Danforth
Jan Sterling as Mary Abbott
Regis Toomey as Det. Bob Geddes
Lamont Johnson as Det. Lannigan
Patrick Waltz as Det. Strauss (as Pat Waltz)
Chuck Connors as Earl Swados
Paula Raymond as Pat Danforth
Emile Meyer as Police Chief Abe Rowan
George Wallace as Det. O'Neill
Chubby Johnson as Greenie
James Westerfield as Police Capt. Marty Harrison
Florenz Ames as Leonard Ustick
Claude Akins as George Mandy
Booth Colman as Wallace
Henry Kulky as Matty
Hugh Boswell as Lynch
Rankin Mansfield as Det. Bledsoe
Leo Cleary as Karns, Police Fingerprint Man
Don Keefer as Det. Cleary


== References ==


== External links ==
The Human Jungle on IMDb
The Human Jungle at AllMovie
The Human Jungle at the TCM Movie Database