Marie Ficarra

Marie Ann Ficarra (born 25 March 1954) is an Australian politician who was a Liberal Party member of the New South Wales Legislative Council from 2007 to 2015.  She was previously a member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly for Georges River, but was defeated during the landslide election of 1999. She was the Shadow Minister for the Environment for the New South Wales Opposition.


== Representative history ==
Ms Ficarra was elected to Hurstville City Council in 1980 to become one of few young women in local government at the time.  She was later the Deputy Mayor and then Mayor of Hurstville City and served in these roles for 16 years until 1995. During this time she was elected president and later life member of the Australian Local Government Women's Association.
On 28 April 2014, Ms Ficarra stood aside as a member of the parliamentary Liberal Party following implication in a hearing of the Independent Commission Against Corruption that she had solicited a donation to the Liberal Party from a prohibited donor. She denied the allegations, but agreed to stand aside from the party and sit on the crossbench as an independent until the matters were resolved.ICAC was “not able to make any findings as to what was said at the meeting of 17 March 2011.” Concerning Ms Ficarra ICAC made no adverse findings and made no recommendations. Ms Ficarra maintains that her evidence in this matter was truthful, complete and uniquely compatible with objective evidence available to ICAC, including the content of text messages she sent and received that day.


== Professional career ==
Ficarra worked in her early career as a scientist investigating children's muscular dystrophy.  She became state manager for Hoechst Australia's Behring Diagnostics and later general manager of Cytyc Australia for Australia and New Zealand for many years.  Cytyc introduced into Australiac new cervical cancer screening technology and other diagnostics applications related to sexual health.


== Education ==
Ficarra has a BSc (Hons) from the University of Sydney.  Following graduation she became a senior tutor at the university in histology and physiology, teaching medical, dental, veterinary science and science students.
As government affairs adviser to Merck Sharp and Dohme Australia, she assisted in obtaining federal government approval and reimbursement for many vital pharmaceuticals including the cervical cancer vaccine. During that time she was elected for three years to the executive of the NSW Liberal Party of which she has been a member for over 30 years.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website