Backline (football)

In the sport of Australian rules football, each of the eighteen players in a team is assigned to a particular named position on the field of play. These positions describe both the player's main role and by implication their location on the ground. As the game has evolved, tactics and team formations have changed, and the names of the positions and the duties involved have evolved too. There are 18 positions in Australian rules football, not including four (sometimes 6–8) interchange players who may replace another player on the ground at any time during play.
The fluid nature of the modern game means the positions in football are not as formally defined as in sports such as rugby or American football. Even so, most players will play in a limited range of positions throughout their career, as each position requires a particular set of skills. Footballers who are able to play comfortably in numerous positions are referred to as utility players.


== Back line ==
The term back line can either refer to the full-back line consisting of the two back pockets and the fullback, or both the full and half-back lines, which collectively can also be referred to as the defence, defensive unit or the back six.


=== Full back ===
The fullback position has always been a purely defensive role, with the aim of stopping the full-forward from getting the ball and scoring. But, in recent times, where the ability to move the ball out of the back and down the field quickly has become a more important tactic, the fullback often starts a chain of passes up the ground. The defensive aspect of the position remains important, with the ability to accelerate and change direction quickly. Spoiling the ball is also of utmost importance. The fullback often kicks the ball back into play after a point has been scored, although some teams prefer a midfielder or the small back pockets for this role, freeing the (typically taller) fullback player to attempt to mark the kick in.
Notable full backs:

George 'Jocka' Todd
Jack Regan
Vic Thorp
Fred Baring
Fred Hughson
Stephen Silvagni
Chris Langford
Geoff Southby
David Dench
Kelvin Moore
Gary Malarkey
Rod Carter
Gary Pert
Michael Brennan
Ashley McIntosh
Darren Gaspar
Ben Rutten
Simon Prestigiacomo
Darren Glass
Brian Lake
Matthew Scarlett
Dustin Fletcher
Mal Michael
Mick Martyn
Shane Wakelin
Tom Jonas
Alex Rance
Harris Andrews


=== Back pocket ===
The back pocket refers to a position on the field deep in defence.
Back pocket players need to have good spoiling skills and usually, quality back-pockets are noted for their hardness. Back pockets generally play on the smaller, faster forward pockets and let the fullback play on the stronger full forward.
Some back-pockets are small, fast players, whose role is to clear a loose ball from defence or play on a forward of similar size and speed. Others are 'mid-sized' defenders, with enough height and strength to contest or spoil marks and enough mobility to fulfil the first role.
Back pocket is not an exclusive position. Tall defenders (i.e. full back/centre half-back) may play in the back pocket to match up effectively on a tall forward playing in the forward pocket.
Numerous back pocket players have gone on to coach successfully, including Kevin Sheedy, Mick Malthouse, Tom Hafey, Denis Pagan and David Parkin.Notable back pocket players:

Wally Donald
Bernie Smith
Brad Hardie
Gary Ayres
Charlie Sutton
Ian Nankervis
John Rantall
Laurie Fowler
Mark Browning
Jeff Dunne
Andrew Collins
Glenn Archer
James Clement
Shane Parker
David Wirrpanda
Michael Green
Chris Johnson
Ang Christou
Gavin Wanganeen
Darren Milburn
Campbell Brown
Ben Hart
Daniel Edwards


== Half-back line ==

The half-back line consists of two half-back flankers and the centre half-back. The role of centre half-back has remained largely unmodified throughout the years. The centre half-back dominates play to a significant extent, and hence is considered a key position in defence.Ideally, the centre half-back should be a durable player, quite tall and well-built. Along with their half-back flankers, centre half-backs are the first line of defence, but also key players in winning the ball, and creating and assisting in attack.Centre half-backs must have a great understanding of team structures, especially the strategies for kick-ins. They need to be able to compete and take contested marks, and also run off their opponent to win uncontested possessions and force their opponents to chase.Notable centre half-backs:

Ron Clegg
Albert Collier
Tom Fitzmaurice
Wally Buttsworth
Gordon Strang
Bert Deacon
Neil Roberts
Col Austen
Gary Hardeman
Peter Knights
Billy Picken
Ross Glendinning
Paul Roos
Chris Mew
Chris Grant
Michael Sexton
Glen Jakovich
Sean Wellman
Justin Leppitsch
Trent Croad
Josh Gibson
Luke McPharlinThe half-back flank is very similar to the back pocket position. However, a true half-back flanker is more attacking and concentrates on rebounding the ball out of the defensive 50. Sometimes half-back flankers even forgo their defensive duties in order to be more attacking. When a half-back flanker is attacking, they play like a wing-back in soccer (or an attacking full-back), and if they are more defensive then they play like a traditional full-back in soccer.
Notable half-back flankers:

Kevin Murray
Bruce Doull
Luke Hodge
Andrew McLeod
Trevor Barker
Ken Fletcher
Wayne Schimmelbusch
Guy McKenna
John Worsfold
Nigel Smart
Mark Bayes
Mervyn Keane
David O'Halloran
Ken Hinkley
Brett Lovett
David Grant
Dean Laidley
Mark Bickley
Grant Birchall
Brett Deledio
Shannon Hurn


== Half-forward line ==


=== Centre half-forward ===
The centre half-forward's role is usually the most demanding of any player on field, with a tall frame, good marking skills, strength and most importantly, athleticism, required.
A centre half-forward who is strongly built and specialises in charging packs is often categorised as a power forward.Notable centre half-forwards:

Wayne Carey
Royce Hart
Albert Thurgood
Barrie Robran
Bernie Quinlan
Ted Whitten
Darrel Baldock
Dermott Brereton
Stephen Kernahan
Garry Lyon
Terry Daniher
Ivor Warne-Smith
Laurie Nash
Ken Hands
Fred Flanagan
Horrie Clover
Ken Fraser
Nick Riewoldt
Matthew Pavlich
Warren Tredrea
Graham Cornes
Kelvin Templeton
Jonathan Brown
Matthew Richardson
Jarryd Roughead
Josh Kennedy
Travis Cloke
Lance Franklin
Taylor Walker


=== Half-forward flank ===
Standing wide of the centre half-forward, the half-forward flankers provide an alternate target for balls coming from the midfield.
Half-forward flankers usually move the ball into the forward line along the flanks. They might kick the ball into the forward line, pass the ball to another running player, or have a shot at goal themselves. These days half-forward flankers usually push into the midfield and, rather than being a specialist position, half-forward flank can be played by centres, wingers, rovers/ruck-rovers, or even attacking half-back flankers.
Notable half-forward flankers:

Darren Jarman
Alex Jesaulenko
Malcolm Blight
Gary Buckenara
Peter Daicos
Wayne Johnston
Michael Turner
Roger Dean
Graham Arthur
Paul Hudson
James Hird
Jason Akermanis
Nicky Winmar
Phil Krakouer
Mick Conlan
Mark Mercuri
Nathan Brown
Brad Johnson
Stevie Johnson
Brent Harvey
Cyril Rioli


== Forward line ==
The forward line, similarly to the back line, can either refer to the full-forward line or both the full- and half-forward lines.


=== Full forward ===
Full forwards are good at one-on-one contests with the opposition and are the main target in the forward line when attacking. This means they can produce mass numbers of goals in a season or match.  Contests in the goalsquare require the strength and weight to be able to jostle or wrestle opponents to front position and keep fullbacks at bay and not as much running is required as midfielders.  As a result, full-forwards are typically both tall and powerfully built.  A full-forward that is strongly built and specialises in charging packs is often categorised as a power forward.
As well as contesting marks with their strength, full forwards will try to run into space to shake off their defender and take an uncontested mark (this is known as "leading", "leading for the ball" or "leading into space"). This means that the full forward needs to be fast, but only in short bursts. In modern times, some teams have experimented by playing a smaller and faster player (possibly a former forward pocket or flanker) at full forward in order to beat the defender with speed rather than strength. In the case of Mark Williams (Hawthorn) and Brad Johnson (Western Bulldogs), this has been extremely successful.
Notable full forwards:

Peter Hudson
John Coleman
Gordon Coventry
Jason Dunstall
Tony Lockett
Doug Wade
Gary Ablett Sr
Bob Pratt
Jack Titus
Jack Moriarty
Harry Vallence
Dick Lee
Ken Farmer
George Doig
Fred Fanning
Peter McKenna
Michael Moncrieff
Alastair Lynch
Matthew Lloyd
Tony Modra
Saverio Rocca
Brendan Fevola
Barry Hall


=== Forward pocket ===
The forward pocket is designed as either a role for a second full forward (also known as a third key forward) or for players who are smaller but faster and more agile and capable of kicking brilliantly on the run (this is the more traditional forward pocket).   Many forward pockets, like rovers, are quick thinking and opportunistic "crumbing" players.  This means that they need to be short enough to pick up the ball quickly after it hits the ground from a contest, think and move quickly to evade potential tackles, and kick or set up a goal.
Like some back pockets, some forward pockets are like medium-sized full forwards - tall and strong enough to contest marks, and mobile enough to crumb the ball. Some players in this mould, such as Russell Robertson, are capable of playing full forward outright.
Crumbing forward pockets do not exclusively crumb the ball. Sometimes, they lead for the ball like full forwards, so they have to be competent at marking the ball. Some forward pockets can even jump so high that they can contest marks, despite their lack of height.
Notable forward pocket players:

Jeff Farmer
Silvio Foschini
Vin Catoggio
Norm Goss
Brad Johnson
Brad Hardie
Leon Davis
Angus Monfries
Phillip Matera
Eddie Betts
Brett Ebert
Stephen Milne
Mark LeCras
Hayden Ballantyne
Michael Walters


== Followers ==

The followers are three different roles, the "ruck", "rover" and "ruck-rover".
Also known as the on-ball division, the followers consist of three players: a ruckman, a ruck-rover and a rover. They are known as followers because they have traditionally been used as players that follow the ball all around the ground as opposed to playing in a set position. With modern Australian rules football there is a decreased emphasis on set positions, but followers generally cover much more ground than other players on the field.
Ruckman - their role is to contest with the opposing ruckman at centre-bounces which  take place at the start of each quarter or after each goal and also at stoppages (i.e., boundary throw ins, ball ups). The ruckman usually uses his height (typically players are over 1.95 metres (6 ft 5 in) tall) to palm or tap the ball down so that a ruck-rover or rover can run onto it—similar to an NBA centre at the tip-off. Traditionally, ruckmen have simply been tall players with limited skill and speed, whose only job was to provide a contest in the ruck. In recent times, however, ruckmen have become faster and more skilled, so they can play as an extra midfielder in between ruck contests.
The tallest AFL players ever are ruckmen Mason Cox (Collingwood), Aaron Sandilands (Fremantle) and Peter Street (Western Bulldogs), all of whom measure 2.11 metres (6 ft 11 in). Before them the record was held by Matthew "Spider" Burton (Fremantle and North Melbourne) at 2.10 metres (6 ft 11 in). Gold Coast's Jarrod Witts also stands at 2.10 metres (6 ft 11 in).
Notable Ruckmen:

Nic Naitanui
Syd Coventry
Jack Dyer
Roy Cazaly
Vic Cumberland
Percy Bentley
Roy Wright
Alan Gale
Jack Clarke
Denis Cordner
Polly Farmer
Sam Newman
Carl Ditterich
John Nicholls
John Schultz
Noel Teasdale
Len Thompson
Gary Dempsey
Don Scott
Stephen Michael
Rick Davies
Graham Moss
Peter Moore
Barry Round
Simon Madden
Peter Carey
Jim Stynes
Shaun Rehn
Scott Wynd
Jeff White
Paul Salmon
Brad Ottens
Peter Everitt
Dean Cox
Aaron Sandilands
Max GawnRuck-rover - their role is to be directly beneath the flight of the ball when a ruckman taps the ball down, allowing an easy take away, or clearance, from a stoppage. Typically, players are not as tall as the ruckman, ranging from 1.70–1.90 metres (5 ft 7 in–6 ft 3 in) in height.
Rover - their role is to lurk around centre bounces and stoppages to receive the ball from a ruckman or ruck-rover and complete a clearance. Rovers are typically the smallest player on the ground. In modern football, the rover, ruck-rover, centreman and wingmen are often grouped together as midfielders.
The traditional ruck-rover and rover positions are an anachronism in today's game. Along with the centre line players, the ruck-rover and rover form the midfield.


== Midfield ==

The traditional centreline consists of the centre and the wingmen. These three players are usually good at winning the ball and running with it. They help turn defence into attack and set up attacking plays. As their main role is to deliver the ball to the forwards, they are sometimes called link men.Physically, centre line players need to have good turning agility, above-average ability to read the play and, as they are involved in both attack and defence, a high level of stamina and teamwork. Furthermore, they must possess very good kicking or handball skills, preferably on both sides of the body.
The centreline and on-ballers form what is known as the midfield. Midfielders are generally separated into two categories: inside midfielders and outside midfielders. The inside midfielders' main responsibility is to win the ball from the stoppages and feed it out to the outside midfielders, who are generally the quicker, more elusive players.
Notable midfielders:

Tom Mitchell
Haydn Bunton
Jack Worrall
Allan La Fontaine
Dick Reynolds
Thorold Merrett
Stan Heal
Les Foote
Bill Hutchison
Bob Quinn
Des Fothergill
Allan Hopkins
Allan Ruthven
Allen Aylett
Bob Hank
Herbie Matthews
Marcus Whelan
Ron Barassi
Jack Clarke
Bob Skilton
Bob Rose
Ian Stewart
Des Tuddenham
John Murphy
Barry Cable
Kevin Bartlett
Peter Bedford
Leigh Matthews
Garry Wilson
Keith Greig
Robert Flower
Maurice Rioli
Wayne Schimmelbusch
Michael Tuck
Gerard Healy
Tim Watson
Dale Weightman
Jim Krakouer
John Platten
Craig Bradley
Greg Williams
Gavin Brown
Garry Hocking
Chris McDermott
Tony McGuinness
Peter Matera
Paul Kelly
Anthony Stevens
Robert Harvey
Michael Voss
Mark Ricciuto
Nathan Buckley
Shane Crawford
Scott West
Simon Black
Daniel Kerr
Nigel Lappin
Gary Ablett, Jr.
Chris Judd
Luke Hodge
Sam Mitchell
Jimmy Bartel
Dane Swan
Scott Pendlebury
Jobe Watson
Joel Selwood
Patrick Dangerfield
Ben Cousins
Dustin Martin
Trent Cotchin
Josh Kennedy


== Taggers ==
Taggers, also known as run-with players or stoppers, mark the opposition's best player (often a midfielder, although sometimes a half-back) and restrict their impact on the game. Good taggers must be fit, disciplined and focused. They must be strong enough to keep their position in stoppages (without conceding free kicks) and contested situations, yet fast enough to match their opponent's spread. Notable taggers include Ryan Crowley, Steven Baker, Brett Kirk, Cameron Ling, Kane Cornes, Ben Jacobs, Brady Rawlings and Shane Heard.


== Interchange bench ==

Players named as the interchange, also often known as the "bench", are not permitted to enter the field of play unless substituting for a player during the game. Up to four players can be named on the bench; this number has steadily increased from a single player in the 1930s. Representative teams (such as State of Origin teams or honorific teams such as the AFL Team of the Century), practise and exhibition matches often feature an extended interchange bench of up to six or eight players.
Up until the 1970s, the single interchange player, known as the "nineteenth man" or the "reserve" acted only as a substitution for an injured or out of form player; the player substituted out of the game could take no further part. Since the 1970s, interchange has increased from two to three to four players, and substitutions may be made as often as the coach wishes, with players allowed to be moved onto and off from the ground for several rests during the game.
The four players named on the interchange bench in the teamsheet (which is submitted ninety minutes before the commencement of the game) must actually start on the bench, however they may be substituted immediately if the coach wishes.


=== Substitute ===
From 2011 until 2015, the AFL level interchange rules provided that each team was permitted three interchange players (instead of four) and one substitute player.
The substitute sat on the bench and began the game wearing a green vest over his playing guernsey. He was not permitted to enter the field of play, nor be interchanged while wearing the green vest. At any time during the game, he could be substituted for one of the other players in the team - either on the ground or on the bench. He took off his green vest, and the player he substituted put on a red vest. The player in the red vest could take no further part in the game. Teams were limited to a single substitution per game. Players were substituted for tactical reasons or to replace an injured player.
From the start of the 2016 season the substitute rule was removed, returning to four available interchange players.


== Utility players ==
There are very few players in the AFL league who possess the skill and poise to be able to consistently perform to a very high standard in many different positions. Some of these players do not receive the recognition they deserve, while others, such as Matthew Pavlich, Jimmy Bartel, and Adam Goodes, are praised for their versatility and ability to influence a game from any position.
Traditionally, a utility player is an unheralded but nonetheless important player. He does not dominate one position, instead he is like a "spare parts" player because he can fill in at a variety of positions and do a good job in each.
Nowadays, the need for more versatility in players has resulted in many players "doubling up" their roles. Practically every midfielder can play Forward Pocket, Back Pocket, Half-Forward Flank or Half-Back Flank. Most, if not all, starting ruckmen can play as tall forwards, or in rarer cases, tall defenders. Some tall defenders can play as tall forwards and vice versa. This means that most AFL players have a specialist position and one or two "fill-in" positions.
One exception to this would be a player who is actually a specialist at two positions, not just a fill-in (i.e. Adam Hunter, the Eagles' best Centre-Half Back, is also one of their most dominant Full Forwards). Another exception would be midfielders, such as James Hird and Anthony Koutoufides, who have the height and strength to play key positions. This requires an extremely rare blend of skills and abilities.
Below are a number of players who are notable for their ability to dominate various positions.
Notable players:

Adam Goodes Centre Half-Back, Ruck Centre, Half-Forward
Bernie Quinlan Ruck-rover, Centre Half-Forward, Full-Forward
Malcolm Blight Ruck-rover, Wing, Half-Forward Flanker, Full-Forward
Barrie Robran Centre, Ruck-rover, Centre Half-Back, Centre Half-Forward, Full-Forward
Alex Jesaulenko Centre, Ruck-rover, Half-Back Flank, Half-Forward Flanker, Full-Forward
Gary Ablett Wing, Half-Forward Flanker, Half-Back Flank, Forward Pocket, Full-Forward
Peter Knights Centre Half-Back, Half-Back Flank, Centre Half-Forward, Half-Forward Flanker, Full-Forward
Phil Carman Centre, Ruck-rover, Centre Half-Forward, Half-Forward Flanker, Full-Forward
Francis Bourke Wing, Half-Back Flank, Full-Back, Full-Forward
Brent Crosswell Centre, Ruck-rover, Half-Forward Flanker, Centre Half-Forward, Centre Half-Back, Half-Back Flank
Terry Daniher Full-Forward, Centre Half-Forward, Half-Forward Flanker, Half-Back Flank, Centre Half-Back, Full Back
Neale Daniher Full-Forward, Centre Half-Forward, Half-Forward Flanker, Half-Back Flank, Centre Half-Back, Ruck-Rover
Anthony Koutoufides Wing, Centre, Ruck, Ruck-rover, Rover, Centre Half-Back, Centre Half-Forward, Full-forward.
Matthew Pavlich - Centre Half-Forward, Centre, Full-Forward, Centre Half-Back, Fullback
Luke Hodge - Centre, Ruck-Rover, Centre Half-Back, Half-Back Flank, Back Pocket, Wing, Half-Forward Flanker, Forward Pocket
James Hird Forward Pocket, Half-Forward Flank, Wing, Rover, Half-Back, Centre Half-Back, Centre Half-Forward
Chad Cornes Centre Half-Back, Half-Forward flank, Centre, Wing, Ruck-Rover, Back Pocket, Tagger
Matthew Richardson. Centre Half-Forward, Full-Forward, Wing
Brendon Goddard Half-Back Flank, Centre Half-Forward, Wing, Half-Forward Flanker, Forward Pocket, Back Pocket, Full-Forward, Centre Half-Back, Centre


== Alternate position and grouping names ==


== See also ==
List of Australian Rules footballers
Flooding
Captain (Australian rules football)


== References ==


== Sources ==
AFL "Guide to Season 2005" (2004) p. 493


== Bibliography ==
McLeod, Andrew; Jaques, Trevor (2006). Australian football : steps to success (2nd ed.). Human Kinetics. ISBN 0-7360-6005-7.
Pascoe, Robert (1995). The winter game : the complete history of Australian football. Port Melbourne: The Text Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-85561-644-1.