Carballo (name)

Carballo is originally a (Spanish, Galician, Catalan and Basque), surname. The surname derived from both a (Galician) and (Portuguese) word meaning Oak, referring to the families settlement's surroundings of forest on mountainous terrain in A Coruña, Galicia, the north western part of Spain. Throughout the years the surname has become more frequent among other countries and the name has had variances in its spelling. It widely became renowned in the early 1600s in the Spanish colonization of the Americas or New Spain and greatly expanded during the 1800s. Spreading from South America, Central America, Mexico and North America, also including the Philippine islands, Cuba and Puerto Rico, territories of Spanish Colonialism or colonial expansion under the Crown of Castile during Spanish holdings in the Age of Discovery.


== Origin of name ==
Carballo has many variations in its spelling from; Carvallo, Carbello, Caballero, Carvalho, Carbalho, Caraballo, Carbajo, Carvajal, Caballer, Cabral, Caballe ,Carballino, Caballería, de Caballos, Caballo, Cavallón, Cavallero, Cabrillo, Carbralo, and many more, and highly due in part to illiteracy in early times. Surnames like Carballo transform in their pronunciation and spelling as they travel across villages, family branches, and countries over the years. In times when literacy was uncommon, names such as Carballo were written down based on their pronunciation when people's names were written in government records. This could have led to misspellings of Carballo. Researching the misspellings and alternate spellings of the Carballo last name are vital to understanding the possible origins of the name.
Some of the first spelling variations for the origins of old name Carballo were found in the County of Castile, an important Christian kingdom or Monarchy of the Middle Ages or medieval Spain. While the patronymic and metronymic surnames, which are derived from the name of the father and mother, respectively are the most common form of a hereditary surname in Spain, occupational surnames are also emerged during the late Middle Ages. Many people, such as the Carballo family, adopted the name of their occupation as their surname. The surname Carballo was an occupational name for a Knight or a knight’s servant.


== Carballo family ==
The Carballo Family did not only settle in South, and Central America, Mexico and North America, but as well as in Cuba and in the Caribbean Islands, Brazil and even in the Philippines.  It has noble and chivalric ranks of Marquês and Marchioness as well as Count and Countess, titles of Spanish nobility according to the laws and traditions of the Spanish monarchy thus establishing nobility. One such figure is, Daniel de Carbalho y de Prat, Count de Pradére, Madrid (10/1867 -04/1933) whose father was, Daniel de Carbalho y Codesido, and mother, Luisa de Prat y Gandiola, Marquês de Barbançon 1837. Another such figure is, María de los Angeles Esquivias Garcia del Cid, Marquesa de San Juan de Carballo. Strong religious ties as well as in Medical and in Engineering. It has Writers, Poets, Builders, Sportsmen, Voyagers and of course Discoverers, such as some of the first Spanish Conquistadors to travel to the New World from the fifteenth to seventeenth centuries. The Carballo family has built/administered churches, missions, parks, shelters for people with little or no resources, and even administered the founding of Caracas. It has founded, and established many civil services throughout the world.The name Carballo is documented to go as far back as 759 AD to Avilense Carballo, alongside, Morales, and Sebastian recorded by  "Menendez Valdez, Miriano",. There was a religious crusade with the Arch Bishop of Spain, the King of Spain and the country of Italy. First records found are that of early 16th century, starting with a military Captain in the Spanish royal navy that for his leadership in a Spanish war was made Marquis. His name is Ferdinand Carballo.


== Discoverers and voyagers ==
 
The Carballo family began its travel to the Americas about the same time as Cristobal Colon aka Christopher Columbus. Some of the first Spaniard voyagers and or settlers of this family name or some of its variants were among the earliest explorers or Conquistadors of the New World were, Juan de Cavallón, a Spaniard military Captain, who voyaged to the America’s in the early 1500s. He claimed the territory of Costa Rica for the Spanish Crown or (Monarchy of Spain), and died in Mexico in 1565. Other early migrants to the New World bearing this surname or a variant spelling of this name included Gutierre de Caballos, who sailed to the Americas in 1512.

Joao Lopez Carvalho, Maritime pilot of the Ship Concepción, acted as Captain General on May 2, 1521, who had taken command after Ferdinand Magellan’s death in the Philippines (April 27, 1521), Timeline of Magellan's circumnavigation . Pedro Álvares Cabral (1468-1520) a Portuguese nobleman, military commander, navigator and explorer regarded as the discoverer of Brazil. Cabral conducted the first substantial exploration of the northeast coast of South America and claimed it for Portugal. Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo (1499-1543) was a navigator and explorer, known for exploring the West Coast of North America on behalf of the Spanish Empire. Cabrillo was the first European explorer to navigate the coast of present-day California in the United States.  Port Captain, at Cádiz, Juan Bautista Topete y Carballo, (May 24, 1821 – October 29, 1885), a Spanish naval commander and politician, born in San Andrés Tuxtla, Mexico. His father and grandfather were also Spanish Admirals.Spaniard Captain,  Rodrigo Flores de Valdez Carballo, (c.1585), Villa de Cangas de Tineo, Principado de Asturias, Kingdom of León, España.Carballo is recognized by the Spanish Royal Crown.  The family coat of arms is as follow; Golden Shield, waves of blue under a grand oak tree,  at the top of the shield, is placed a closed Royal Crown, per Spanish Royal Decree 544/2005, (October 31, 2005), D.O.G. No. 209 
The Carballo Family Motto is "Upwards and Onwards", Derived from the Kingdom of Spain, "El Reino de España, Plus ultra (motto) Latin, translates to "Further Beyond"


== The Carvalho and Carvallo families ==
Carvalho
The Portuguese branch of the lineage is traced back to Bartolomeo Domingues de Carvalho, whose son Fernao Gomez de Carvalho was a military officer under the son of King Dinis of Portugal.  One of the sons of Fernao, Gil Fernandes de Carvalho, was made a Nobleman in Spain as part of the Order of the Caballeros de Santiago.
The shield of arms, Coat of arms, of the Carvalho, family can be described as follows:  Three ostrich feathers on top of the navy blue shield.  On the navy blue shield, there is one bright golden eight point star surrounded by eight white crescent moons.
Another important ancestor is Sebastião José de Carvalho e Mello, Marquês de Pombal (1699-1782), a Portuguese statesman, who was the virtual ruler of the country during the reign (1750–77) of Joseph Emanuel.  Sebastião was born in Lisbon on May 13, 1699, and educated at the University of Coimbra.
In 1738 he was appointed Ambassador to London and seven years later was sent to Vienna in a similar capacity. 
In 1750 Joseph I of Portugal, King Joseph appointed him Minister of state, and he soon proved his administrative talents. When the devastating 1755 Lisbon earthquake struck, he organized the relief efforts and planned its rebuilding.
He was made Chief Minister in 1756, and from then on his powers were practically absolute.  Sebastião abolished slavery in Portugal, reorganized the educational system, and published a new code of laws. 
In addition he effected the reorganization of the army, the introduction of new colonists into the Portuguese settlements, and the establishment of an East India Company and other companies for trade with Brazil. Agriculture, commerce, and finances were all improved. 
The king made him a Marquis in 1770.  Sebastião's power ended with the death of the king. Sebastião retired to Pombal, Paraíba, where he died on May 8, 1782.
Carvallo
The Carvallo name is the Lusitan form of the Galician name Carballo.  Its origin is taxonomic and derived from the name of the place where one lived or the property owner was from and the founder of the Lineage (anthropology).
Carvallo was taken directly from "Carballo", which was a place in the province of Lugo in Galicia.  Hence, someone from that province was someone from Carballo.  Carballo comes from the Portuguese word Carvalho, which means Oak. Therefore, this name means the place where the Oaks come from.
In Portugal, Carvalho is also the name of a province in the district of Pe acova, within the Carvalho Mountains. In Spain, during the re-conquest years or the Reconquista, the name Carballo was extended from Galicia to the Iberian Peninsula and to the Canary Islands.
The spelling of the name Carvallo, with a "v", lineage dates its origins back to Viscaya or the Biscay.  During most recent findings, several members of this lineage sailed for the new world in the latter 19th century, arriving in countries like Chile, Argentina, Mexico, United States, and Venezuela.
The lineage that established itself in Venezuela built roots in Caracas and Valencia. Most of the members of this lineage became businessmen, lawyers, politicians and economists.
On the branch that settled itself in Valencia, it is worth mentioning that six members of the family have been Governors of the city and its state over the last 100 years


== Sports players ==


== Other notable Carballo's ==


== Other spellings ==


== Gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


== Historical timeline for Migration and Military Veteran Burials ==


== References ==
≈


== External links ==
Concello de Carballo