Gang Gang (Schoolboy Q song)

Crash Talk (stylized as CrasH Talk) is the fifth studio album by American rapper Schoolboy Q, released on April 26, 2019, through Top Dawg Entertainment and distributed by Interscope Records. The album features guest appearances from Travis Scott, 6lack, Ty Dolla Sign, YG, 21 Savage, Kid Cudi, and Lil Baby. It was supported by three singles: "Numb Numb Juice", "Chopstix", and "Floating". 
Crash Talk received generally positive reviews from critics and debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200. It is Schoolboy Q's third US top 10 album.


== Background ==
In February 2017, in an interview with Zane Lowe on Beats 1, Schoolboy Q revealed that his new album was close to completion and the direction he wanted to go with the album, explaining; 

On September 26, 2017, Q shared an update on his forthcoming album, saying the album was 90 percent completed. However, on July 31, 2018, Top Dawg Entertainment's CEO Anthony "Top Dawg" Tiffith announced on Twitter that Schoolboy Q's next album was 90 to 95 percent complete, contrary to Q's statement.In September 2018, Q announced that he delayed his album, originally scheduled for a November 2018 release, following the death of frequent collaborator and friend, Mac Miller. On April 15, 2019, the album's title and release date were revealed.


== Artwork ==
The album's artwork features a somber comic book-type animation of Schoolboy Q with a paper bag over his head while dollar bills cover his hoodie. The artwork was painted by Blue the Great.


== Singles ==
The album's lead single, "Numb Numb Juice", was released for digital download on March 13, 2019. The song was produced by Hykeem Carter, DJ Fu, Nez & Rio. The music video was released on March 13, 2019. The music video was directed by Dave Free and Jack Begert. The song peaked at number 55 on the US Billboard Hot 100.The album's second single, "Chopstix", was released on April 8, 2019. The song was produced by DJ Dahi. The music video was released on April 10, 2019. The music video was directed by Nabil."Floating" featuring 21 Savage, was sent to rhythmic contemporary radio on June 11, 2019, as the album's third single.


=== Promotional ===
The lead promotional single, "Crash", was released on April 24, 2019.


== Critical reception ==
Crash Talk was met with generally positive reviews. At Metacritic, the album received an average score of 69, based on seven reviews.Kyann-Sian Williams of NME gave a positive review, stating "The album's slower tempo won't be for everyone: if you're all thrills, no substance, then maybe this album is not for you. But you have to respect ScHoolboy Q's dedication to showing us a different outlook on life, and exploring many emotions. Introspective—yes, but these are songs for the summer." Kyle Mullin of Exclaim! said, "From those raw, candid lyrics, to ScHoolboy's increasing pop acumen, CrasH Talk reveals many sides of an increasingly (and compellingly) unpredictable MC." Andy Kellman of AllMusic saying "At 40 minutes, this is easily Q's leanest LP. It would be meaner with the removal of the inane Travis Scott collaboration "CHopstix", the uncharacteristic single." HipHopDX critic Scott Glaysher said, "There are without doubt a few tracks on this album that could make it to your favorite ScHoolboy playlist but said "few" don't outweigh the remaining dozen that fall flat on their blank face." Alphonse Pierre of Pitchfork stated, "CrasH Talk might not have the mean-mugging raps of Blank Face LP or the weed-infused smoker anthems of Habits & Contradictions, but it's comforting, like diving into the fifth or sixth season of your favorite network sitcom."In a mixed review, Pretty Much Amazing's Marshall Gu stated: "DJ Dahi, Sounwave and Cardo handle the bulk of beats here, with additional help from ScHoolboy staples Nez & Rio, plus the venerable Boi-1da and Jake One. Except the results are less Damn. and more Redemption, the Jay Rock album from last year that everyone has already forgotten."


== Commercial performance ==
Crash Talk debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 chart, moving 81,000 album-equivalent units (including pure album sales of 18,000 copies) in its first week. It is Schoolboy Q's third US top 10 album. In its second week, the album dropped to number seven on the chart, earning an additional 33,000 album-equivalent units that week.


== Track listing ==
Credits adapted from Tidal and iTunes' metadata.
Notes

Tracks 3 and 12 are stylized with the capital letter "H". For example, "Chopstix" is stylized as "CHopstix" and "Crash" is stylized as "CrasH"
"Gang Gang" features additional vocals by Zacari
"Drunk" features additional vocals by Kendrick Lamar and Kid Cudi
"5200" features additional vocals by Kendrick Lamar
"Crash" features additional vocals by Mac Miller
"Water" features additional vocals by CardoSample credits

"Crash" contains a sample from "Boom", written by Ryan Montgomery, and Christopher Martin, and performed by Royce da 5'9".


== Personnel ==
Partial credits adapted from Tidal.Technical

Aria Angel Ali – mixing (tracks 3, 4)
Cyrus "NOIS" Taghipour – mixing (tracks 3)
Derek "MixedByAli" Ali – mixing (tracks 3, 4)


== Charts ==


== References ==