Boris Badenov

Boris Badenov is the main antagonist of the 1959–1964 animated cartoons Rocky and His Friends and The Bullwinkle Show, collectively referred to as The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show for short. He was voiced by Paul Frees.Badenov's name is a pun on that of the 16th-century Russian Tsar Boris Godunov. His accent and explosive temper are a homage to Hollywood actor Akim Tamiroff, especially Tamiroff's role in The Great McGinty, a 1940 movie directed by Preston Sturges.
Badenov was created by Bill Scott, who based the character's appearance on that of Gomez Addams.


== Character overview ==
Boris is a spy from the fictional nation of Pottsylvania, and takes orders from the strongman known as Fearless Leader (and occasionally the rarely seen Mr. Big). Boris's missions range from trying to steal a secret rocket fuel formula to eliminating all television from the United States as part of Pottsylvania's various attempts to seize power. Boris, who is thoroughly dedicated to (and takes delight in) all manners of nefarious deeds, would also sometimes engage in his own schemes, such as starting his own organized crime gang and hiring himself out as a professional executioner, and frequently conspires schemes simply to get rich (such as by posing as a Hollywood director to bilk Bullwinkle out of his life savings in "The Last Angry Moose" or usurping Santa Claus by taking advantage of a freak polar drift in "Topsy Turvy World"). Separately from the television series, a commercial for the Rocky and Bullwinkle Show featuring Boris established that he was an active member of Local 12 of the Villains, Thieves, and Scoundrels Union. During this commercial, Boris also claims to be "the world's greatest nogoodnik." Boris is also quite proud of the fact that the nicest thing Fearless Leader ever did for him was sending a picture of himself to Boris inscribed "Drop Dead — Fearless Leader".
According to the Rialto Theater's "Moosebill" for "Downhill: The Musical" (a special table of contents insert created for the DVD box set Rocky and Bullwinkle & Friends, The Third Season), Boris was educated in the Pottsylvania public schools before taking a scoundrelship to U.S.C. (the University of Safe Cracking), from which he graduated magna cum louse. He has a cast-iron stomach; and because of it was one of only three survivors of the ruling clique of Pottsylvania, the other two being his superiors Fearless Leader and Mister Big. Boris enjoys light reading; his favorite book is an anthology of fiendish plans called the Fireside Crook Book. He is also a charter member of the Van Gogh Society, a Pottsylvanian club whose members collect human ears.
Early in the series, Boris was taller and had red eyes. After the first episodes, he changed to his normal height, but still retained the red eyes until a few episodes afterwards. Humorously, they changed from red to white after he had woken up from a long slumber, as if the redness was caused by sleep deprivation.
Boris is nearly always accompanied by his fellow criminal, Natasha Fatale. The first time he appeared without her was in the story arc, "Buried Treasure". The first story arc where neither appeared was "The Three Moosketeers".
Usually, Boris's misdeeds are thwarted by Rocky the Flying Squirrel and Bullwinkle the Moose. Boris's attempts at killing "moose and squirrel" (as he refers to them) also always end in failure, usually by his own scheme backfiring on him. "Of course, I've got plan!" he says. "I've always got plan! They don't ever work, but I've always got one!" As Boris expresses his plight in one promo: "I send in lady spy with package which is really bomb. Door gets locked, she can't get out, who gets blown up? Me!" Boris appeared in all but three Rocky and Bullwinkle storylines: The Three Moosketeers, The Ruby Yacht, and Mucho Loma. Boris often appeared in segments of Bullwinkle's Corner, Mr. Know-It-All, and The Rocky and Bullwinkle Fan Club.


== Catchphrases ==
Boris's main catchphrase (spoken when frustrated) is "Raskolnikov!" (a reference to the novel Crime and Punishment by Dostoevsky), spoken in his Pottsylvanian accent (a mock-Russian accent).
Boris would also say, "Sharrup you mouth!" to Natasha when his schemes failed. However, in the final segment of "Greenpernt Oogle", when he and Natasha were stuck in their own mine field, he says to her, "Natasha, next time I get fiendish plan, do me big favor? Sharrup my mouth!" She does indeed do this in one episode, saying those very words to Boris as the car they were in dropped over a cliff to the ground in the 8-segmented story arc "The Treasure of Monte Zoom". Also, whenever his superior gives him an order, he utters the line "You sair it!"
Boris would usually greet a new acquaintance by saying, "Allow me to introducing myself. I am Boris Badenov, world's greatest no-goodnik."


== In other media ==
In the 1992 Showtimes Network film Boris and Natasha: The Movie, the live-action Boris was played by Dave Thomas.
In the 2000 theatrical film The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle, the live-action Boris was played by Jason Alexander.
Boris reappears in the 2014 3D DreamWorks Animation short film Rocky & Bullwinkle, where he was voiced by Robert Cait.
Boris now appears in the 2018 Amazon Video series The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle, where he is now voiced by Benjamin Diskin.


== Disguises ==
Boris usually assumes a cover identity with a gag name, including:

Swami Ben Boris (Jet Fuel Formula)
Sir Thomas Lippen-Boris (Jet Fuel Formula)
Sir Hilary Pushemoff (Jet Fuel Formula)
Hemlock Soames (Box Top Robbery)
Mojave Max, a prospector (Upsidaisium)
A scientist (Jet Fuel Formula)
Cerulean Bleu, an art collector (Painting Theft)
Abou Ben Boris (Upsidaisium)
Gunga Drain (Upsidaisium and Bumbling Brothers Circus)
An "imposter" five-star general (Upsidaisium)
Rocky
Ace Ricken-Boris (Jet Fuel Formula)
"The Big Cheese" (Metal Munching Mice)
Madman Morris (The Treasure of Monte Zoom)
Colonial Tomsk Parkoff (Metal Munching Mice) – this is a takeoff of Colonel Tom Parker
Mayor Avaricious J. Wardheeler (Bumbling Brothers Circus)
Clarence Darrownoff, the lawyer (Jet Fuel Formula)
Alfred Hitchhike, a movie director (The Last Angry Moose)
An Indian (Jet Fuel Formula)
D.W. Grifter, a talent scout (The Last Angry Moose)
Horatio Hornswaggle (Wailing Whale)
An art gallery guard (Painting Theft)
"Devil Dan" Hatful (Missouri Mish Mash)
Egbert Kitchie Itchie (Banana Formula)
Felonious Floy (Missouri Mish Mash)
Salesman of Dancer, Prancer, Blitzen & Fink advertising agency (Moosylvania Saved)
A ship's doctor (Banana Formula)
A track walker (Missouri Mish Mash)
A British police officer (Rue Brittania)
Big Chief Skunk-Who-Walks-Like-Man (Bumbling Brothers Circus)
A doctor/surgeon (Rue Brittania)
A little boy (Painting Theft)
A butler (Rue Britannia)
Spencer Traceback (The Treasure of Monte Zoom)
Pete McMoss (Pottsylvania Creeper)
Hushaboom inventor Bermuda Schwartz's mother (Banana Formula)
Honeychile Moosemoss (Buried Treasure)
Little Old Apple "Witch Lady" (Louse On Ninety-Second Street)
Babyface Braunschweiger, the Minnesota Monster (Buried Treasure)
Sherlock Ohms (Missouri Mish Mash)
Hailfellow J. Backslap, Official Washington Greeter (Missouri Mish Mash)
Black Angus (Lazy J. Ranch)
"Crazy Legs" Cowpuss, the football player (Wossamotta U)
Santa Claus (Topsy Turvy World)
Claude Badley, a lion tamer (Bumbling Brothers Circus)
A taxi driver (Jet Fuel Formula and Moosylvania)
A steamboat captain / card player (The Weather Lady)
Van N. Storridge, a moving man (Moosylvania Saved)
Igmar Badenov, director (The Rocky and Bullwinkle Fan Club segment)
The Knave of Hearts (Bullwinkle's Corner segment "The Queen of Hearts")
The pieman (Bullwinkle's Corner segment "Simple Simon")Rocky and Bullwinkle never see through Boris's wacky disguises, though Rocky often says that his face or voice seems familiar.


== References ==