Wildflowers (Tom Petty album)

Wildflowers is the second solo studio album by American musician Tom Petty, released on November 1, 1994. The album was the first released by Petty after signing a contract with Warner Bros. Records (where he had recorded as part of the Traveling Wilburys) and the first of three albums produced by Rick Rubin. The album was certified 3× platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America.


== Background ==
The album features all members of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, with the exception of drummer Stan Lynch. Steve Ferrone plays drums on Wildflowers and would join the band officially the following year. However, the album was not credited to the Heartbreakers because, in Petty's words, "Rick (Rubin) and I both wanted more freedom than to be strapped into five guys." Freedom notwithstanding, Petty chose to use most of his regular band as session players, demonstrating his comfort with that format. Rolling Stone placed Wildflowers at number 12 on their list of the best albums of the 1990s. Guitar World placed the album at number 49 in their "Superunknown: 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994" list.Four singles were released from the album between 1994 and 1995, the most successful of which, "You Don't Know How It Feels", reached No. 13 on the Billboard Hot 100 and topped the Album Rock Tracks chart for one week. It was followed by "You Wreck Me", "It's Good to Be King" and "A Higher Place" which reached Nos. 2, 6, and 12 respectively on the Mainstream Rock chart.In April 2015, when Petty's back catalog was released in High-resolution audio, this was one of only two albums not included in the series (Songs and Music from "She's the One" was the other one), but a hi-res version was available on Pono Music.


== Track listing ==
All songs written by Tom Petty, except where noted.

"Wildflowers" – 3:11
"You Don't Know How It Feels" – 4:49
"Time to Move On" – 3:15
"You Wreck Me" (Petty, Mike Campbell) – 3:22
"It's Good to Be King" – 5:10
"Only a Broken Heart" – 4:30
"Honey Bee" – 4:58
"Don't Fade on Me" (Petty, Campbell) – 3:32
"Hard on Me" – 3:48
"Cabin Down Below" – 2:51
"To Find a Friend" – 3:23
"A Higher Place" – 3:56
"House in the Woods" – 5:32
"Crawling Back to You" – 5:05
"Wake Up Time" – 5:19


== Outtakes ==
"Girl on LSD" was released as the B-side of the "You Don't Know How It Feels" single (1994).
"Leave Virginia Alone" was another song written and recorded during the sessions and left off the finished album. It was given to Rod Stewart for his album A Spanner in the Works (1995).
Several outtakes were included on the She's the One soundtrack album (1996).
In 2015, Petty released the track "Somewhere Under Heaven" as promotion for a 20th anniversary two-disc Wildflowers re-release, which has yet to materialize.
In 2018, outtake "Lonesome Dave," recorded July 23, 1993, was released on Petty's posthumous box set An American Treasure.


== Personnel ==
Musicians

Mike Campbell – guitars (acoustic, electric, 12-string, slide, bass guitar), harpsichord, coral sitar
Lenny Castro – percussion
Howie Epstein – backing vocals, bass guitar on "You Wreck Me", "Honey Bee" and "Cabin Down Below"
Steve Ferrone – drums except on "To Find a Friend"
Brandon Fields – saxophone on "House in the Woods"
Gary Herbig – saxophone on "House in the Woods"
Jim Horn – saxophone on "House in the Woods"
Kim Hutchcroft – saxophone on "House in the Woods"
Phil Jones – percussion on "You Wreck Me" and "Cabin Down Below"
Michael Kamen – orchestration, conductor  on "Wildflowers", "Time to Move On", "It's Good to Be King" and "Wake Up Time"
Tom Petty – guitars (acoustic, electric, 12-string, bass guitar), harmonica, piano, Hammond organ, lead and backing vocals
John Pierce – bass guitar on "Hard on Me"
Marty Rifkin – pedal steel guitar on "House in the Woods"
Ringo Starr – drums on "To Find a Friend"
Benmont Tench – harmonium, piano, Hammond organ, mellotron, orchestron, zenon
Carl Wilson – backing vocals on "Honey Bee"Production

Joe Barresi – assistant engineer
David Bianco – engineer
Mike Campbell – producer
Richard Dodd – engineer, mixer
Steve Holyrod – assistant engineer
Kenji Nasai – assistant mixer
Tom Petty – producer
Rick Rubin – producer
Jim Scott – engineer
Jeff Sheehan – assistant engineer


== Charts ==
Weekly Charts


==== Singles ====


== Certifications ==


== References ==