John B. Fullerton

John B. Fullerton is the founder and president of Capital Institute, "a collaborative working to explore and effect economic transition to a more just, regenerative, and thus sustainable way of living on this earth through the transformation of finance."  Through the work of Capital Institute, regular public speaking engagements, and university lectures, John has become a recognized thought leader in the New Economy space generally, and the financial system transformation challenge in particular.  John is the author of Regenerative Capitalism: How Universal Principles And Patterns Will Shape
Our New Economy.


== Biography ==
John Fullerton is also a recognized “impact investment” practitioner as the principal of Level 3 Capital Advisors.  Level 3’s direct investments are primarily focused on sustainable, regenerative land use, food, and water issues. Through both Capital Institute and Level 3, John brings a unique theory and practice approach to financial system transformation.
Previously, John Fullerton was a managing director of JPMorgan where he worked for over 18 years.  At JPMorgan, John managed various capital markets and derivatives business around the globe, then shifted focus to private investments and was subsequently the chief investment officer of LabMorgan through the merger with Chase Manhattan before retiring from the bank in 2001.
Following JPMorgan, and after experiencing 9-11 first hand, John spent years embarked on more entrepreneurial ventures as an impact investor while engaging in deep study of our multiple interconnected systemic crises that led to the founding of Capital Institute, officially launched in 2010.
John Fullerton was a member of the Long Term Capital Oversight Committee that managed the $3.6 Billion rescue of the distressed hedge fund in 1998.  He is a co-founder and director of  holistic ranch management company Grasslands, LLC, a director of New Day Farms, Savory Institute, and the New Economy Coalition, a trustee of the V. Kann Rasmussen Foundation, and an advisor to Armonia, LLC, the UNEP Finance Inquiry, and Richard Branson’s Business Leader’s initiative (“B Team”).  In spring 2014, John was nominated and became a member of Club of Rome.
John writes the "Future of Finance" blog, which is widely syndicated on platforms such as The Guardian, The Huffington Post, CSRWire, the New York Society of Security Analysts’ blog, and other publications.  He has appeared on PBS Frontline, and been featured in pieces by the New York Times, Bloomberg, Wall Street Journal, Barrons, WOR radio, Real News Network, INET, Think Progress, The Laura Flanders Show on GRITtv, and The Free Forum Show with Terrence NcNally.
John received a BA in Economics from the University of Michigan, and an MBA from the Stern School of Business at New York University.


== Thought pieces ==
"A 'Gospel of Wealth' for the 21st Century," (Alliance Magazine, June 2013).
"Financial Overshoot," (Future of Finance Blog, July 2012).
"Limits to Investment," (Great Transition Initiative at Tellus Institute, April 2014).
"The Big Choice," (Future of Finance Blog, July 2011).
"The Relevance of E. F. Schumacher in the 21st Century," (Schumacher Center for a New Economics, May 2008).


== References ==