Big in Japan: Live in Tokyo 2010

Big in Japan: Live in Tokyo 2010 is the fortieth album by Klaus Schulze. Taking in consideration the previously released multi-disc box sets (Silver Edition, Historic Edition, Jubilee Edition, Contemporary Works I, and Contemporary Works II), it could be viewed as Schulze's one hundred and first album. This album contains music from two concerts at the Tokyo Kokusai Forum Hall in Tokyo, Japan on March 20–21, 2010 in Schulze's first visit to Japan. This is Schulze's first album without guest vocalist Lisa Gerrard since his 2007 album Kontinuum. The album was originally released on September 22, 2010 in Japan by Captain Trip Records as a limited edition deluxe boxed set (500 copies) of two CDs and a DVD with an 80-page photo book. This became known as the "Japanese Edition". A slightly different general release was released in Europe on November 26, 2010. This version, named the "European Edition", features a different track order between the CDs and the DVD, and slightly different track lengths. On April 19, 2011, a third version of Big in Japan was released in the United States. This "American Edition" consists of the same two CDs as the European version, but features a completely different DVD.


== Track listing ==
All tracks composed by Klaus Schulze.
Disc 1

Disc 2

DVD


== Difference between editions ==


== Notes ==
The music is not presented chronologically. On March 20, these tracks were played in the following sequence:

The Crystal Returns
Sequencers are Beautiful
The Deductive ApproachOn March 21, these tracks were played in the following sequence:

A Crystal Poem
La Joyeuse Apocalypse
Nippon Benefit


== References ==


== External links ==
Big in Japan: Live in Tokyo 2010 (Japanese Edition) at the official site of Klaus Schulze
Big in Japan: Live in Tokyo 2010 (European Edition) at the official site of Klaus Schulze
Big in Japan: Live in Tokyo 2010 (American Edition) at the official site of Klaus Schulze
Big in Japan: Live in Tokyo 2010 at Discogs (list of releases)