Robert Gentry (actor)

Robert Gentry (born September 29, 1940 in New York City) is known for his work on several daytime soap operas. He played the role of Ed Bauer on Guiding Light on two different occasions, first from 1966 to 1969, then returned nearly 30 years later to play the role on a recurring basis from 1997 to 1998. He initially left the role to appear on a new ABC soap opera, The Best of Everything.
He played two characters on Another World.  From 1979-81, he played the character of the opportunistic Philip Lyons who became involved with Pat Randolph while sleeping with Cecile de Poulignac, then returned in 1997-98 to play the role of Detective Craig Morris.  In 1983, he had the short-term role of Giles Morgan on One Life to Live, the brother of Echo DiSavoy (Kim Zimmer) who aided her in a revenge scheme against Clint Buchanan for the alleged murder of their mother.
His longest tenure, however, was on All My Children, where he played the part of Ross Chandler for seven years (1983–1990). As the nephew of powerful Adam Chandler, he was revealed to be the illegitimate son of Palmer Cortlandt. In 1990, on Generations, he played the role of villain Jordan Hale who married the character of Sam Whitmore, portrayed by Kelly Rutherford for her money and ended up being murdered. He also played the part of Richard Hunt on Days of Our Lives from 1994 to 1995, as well as several other shorter roles on other serials.
One of these was on the CBS soap The Bold & The Beautiful where he played Elliot, the Forrester family attorney who represented the Forresters when they agreed to give Eric Forrester's former second wife Brooke Logan 51% of Forrester Creations, after she created a wrinkle free formula called "Belief", which left the Forrester family with 49%. He also represented Thorne Forrester when he divorced his second wife, Macy Alexander.
He has also turned up periodically as a guest on a number of prime time series. In the early-1970s he co-starred with Agnes Moorehead in the film Dear Dead Delilah.


== Recognition ==
In 1988, Gentry was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series.


== References ==


== External links ==
Robert Gentry on IMDb