Uchuu Keiji Sharivan

Space Sheriff Sharivan (宇宙刑事シャリバン, Uchū Keiji Shariban) is the second installment in Toei's Metal Hero Series franchise and aired on TV Asahi from March 4, 1983 to February 24, 1984. It served as a direct sequel to its predecessor, Space Sheriff Gavan and featured many of the same characters.
For distribution purposes, Toei refers to this television series as Space Guardian Shariban.


== Plot ==
Initially appearing in Space Sheriff Gavan, Den Iga is attacked by a monster called Buffalo Doubler, member of the Space Mafia Makuu. Den is seriously injured in the attack when he is found by Gavan, who takes him to Planet Bird for medical assistance. Qom, leader of the Galactic Union Police (銀河連邦警察, Ginga Renpō Keisatsu), is impressed by Den's courage. Den returns in the final episode of Gavan, saving Gavan himself in his newly acquired form of Space Sheriff Sharivan during Gavan's final battle. After Don Horror is defeated, Sharivan is assigned to Earth and is partnered together with Lily from the planet Bird as he deals with the threat of the Madou Space Crime Syndicate on Earth.


== Characters ==


=== Grand Birth crew ===
Based on the Grand Birth (グランドバース, Gurando Bāsu), it serves as headquarters of Den and Lily as it circles around the Earth. It has two modes: Battle Mothership move able to fires the Birth Beam and the vaguely humanoid Battle Birth Formation that fires the Grand Buster and Plasma Cannon (the latter being based on the blueprints of the Space Cannon built by Voicer, Gavan's father).

Den Iga (伊賀 電, Iga Den)  Originally from Inner Iga Island, he served as forest patroller until fatally wounded by Buffalo Doubler and saved by Gavan who brought him to Planet Bird to undergo special training to become Space Sheriff Sharivan (宇宙刑事シャリバン, Uchū Keiji Shariban), aiding Gavan during his final battle with the Makuu before assigned to protect Earth in his predecessor's place. When he transforms with the command Sekisha (赤射, Sekisha, Red Shine), the Grand Birth envelops him with Solar Metal particles that it absorbs from solar flares to form his armor within milliseconds. As Sharivan, he uses the Laser Blade sword in his signature move Sharivan Crash or the Crime-Buster hand gun. Sharivan uses Prism Goggles to see clearly the object. It is a rectangular yellow glasses with crystal particles.
Lily (リリー, Rirī)  Sharivan's girlfriend from Planet Bird.


==== Arsenal ====
Motosharian (モトシャリアン)  Sharivan's motorcycle, capable of entry into the Phantom Dream World.
Sharinger Tank (シャリンガータンク, Sharingā Tanku)  Sharivan's tank, which splits into a flying upper half and treaded lower half.
Mogriran (モグリラン, Moguriran)  Sharivan's drill-headed vehicle.


=== Galactic Union Patrol ===
Captain Gavan  The Space Sheriff who was previously assigned on Earth.
The Organizers (オーガナイザー, Ōganaizā,  27 and 50)  The anti-Madou resistance, represented by Moore, Keith, and Rita, who aid Sharivan.
Iga Warriors (伊賀戦士, Iga Senshi,  51)  The mystical warriors from Iga Planet to protect the wonders and civilizations of the Iga Crystal. Membered by Jack, Henry, Maria and Kirk
Billy and Helen Bell (ビリーとヘレンベル, Birī to Heren Beru,  36-42)  Iga warrior siblings trained to be Space Sheriffs. After Billy is killed, Helen becomes Sharivan's apprentice to avenge his death.


=== Space Crime Syndicate Madou ===
The  Space Crime Syndicate Madou (宇宙犯罪組織マドー, Uchū Hantsumi Soshiki Madō, literally "demon way") is an organization of psychic criminals whose headquarters, Genmu Castle (幻夢城, Genmu Shiro), lies within the Genmu World (幻夢界, Genmukai, Phantom Dream World) dimension, a "white hole" where all the matter sucked up by black holes ends up. The syndicate intends to conquer the universe through chaos created by its members' psionic abilities, along with their space fighters and the Madou Battleship.

Demon King Psycho (魔王サイコ, Maō Saiko)  The immobile ruler of Madou, able to project his consciousness into multiple forms such as his fully mobile cyborg body Psychorror which is armed with twin swords that emit lightning bolts. With Gavan dealing with Psychorror, Sharivan destroys Psycho. However, by the events of Kamen Rider × Super Sentai × Space Sheriff: Super Hero Taisen Z which introduced a detachment from his conscious named Psycholon, Psycho's true body is revealed to be Genmu Castle itself as he is revived from the energy of the Galactic Union Police's Super Dimension Cannon. However, Psycho is destroyed for good by the teamwork of the Space Sheriffs, the Kyoryugers and Kamen Rider Wizard.
General Gyrer (ガイラー将軍, Gairā Shōgun, 1-49)  A black-armored field commander who is defeated by Sharivan. In the cross-over movie, Retsu, Den and Dai mistakenly thought Gyrer had revived, but he was actually a vendor who just looks like Gyrer, much to the Trio's Surprise.
Doctor Polter (ドクターポルター, Dokutā Porutā)  A female strategist who dies fighting against Sharivan and Gavan.
Reider (レイダー, Reidā, 34-50): A mystic from the Death Spirit World who intended to take over Madou, only to be destroyed by Psychorror. But during the events of Kamen Rider × Super Sentai × Space Sheriff: Super Hero Taisen Z, Reider revived to aid in Psycho's resurrection through the Space Shocker organization he provides his magic to. Though killed, Reider is revived as Space Reider before being destroyed for good by Kamen Ride Beast and Kyoryu Gold.
Miss Akuma 1 and 2 (ミスアクマ1ト2, Misu Akuma, 1 & 2)  Gyrer, and Doctor Polter's female aides. Miss Akuma 2 was devoured by Gamagon. Miss Akuma 1 was killed along with her mistress while fighting Sharivan and Gavan.
Soldier Psychoers (戦士サイコラー, Senshi Saikorā)  Also referred to as Fighters, they serve as the foot soldiers of Madou in black tights decorated with lightning bolts.
Bengel Brothers  A pair of space pirates from Dark Cloud Mazalan that appear in episode 11 that briefly join the Madou named Bengel Tiger and Bengel Cobra. Both of them are quickly killed off by Sharivan's Crime Buster and their data was used to create Shouri Beast. Bengel Tiger's powers include mines, a sword, cloaking, hand flames called the Bengel Fire, explosive thread, and a bowie knife. Bengel Cobra's powers include mines, a spear, cloaking, hand flames called the Bengel Fire, explosive thread, and a wrist claw.


=== Makai Beast ===
Makai Beasts (魔怪獣, Makaijū): The monsters created by Psycho which usually have a two-mode gimmick. During a fight with Sharivan, a Makai Beast retreats into the Phantom Dream World where it becomes four times more powerful in an attempt to get the upper hand against Sharivan.

Gori Beast  This monster appeared in episode 1. Its powers include curling into a saw bladed ball, high jumping, a head shell, a kilaj sword, and a halberd.
Ei Beast  This monster appeared in episode 2. Its powers include gliding, a mentally controlled spear, teleportation, and summoning holograms.
Kiba Beast  This monster appeared in episode 3. Its powers include teleportation, explosive electric streams and eye flashes, and a mentally controlled forked spear.
Maicon Beast  This monster appeared in episode 4. Its powers include a mentally controlled pincer claw staff, teleportation, invisibility, and explosive electric streams.
Sound Beast  This monster appeared in episode 5. Its powers include a human disguise, a flute that enhances telekinesis, teleportation, and a crescent bladed staff.
Yamagami Beast  This monster appeared in episode 6. Its powers include high jumping, a mentally controlled spear, emitting electric surges, teleportation, and a chain.
Double Beast  This monster appeared in episode 7. Its powers include teleportation, possessing espers, a clawed staff, and explosive torches. It heavily resembles the xenomorph drone from the original Alien.
Doku Beast  This monster appeared in episode 8. Its powers include invisibility, dioxin spray from the mouth, a scythe, and a sword.
Cash Beast  This monster appeared in episode 9. Its powers include teleportation, a mentally controlled staff with a mace at the end that emits electric surges, mirages, controlling and spawning doors, invisibility, and a sword.
UFO Beast  This monster appeared in episode 10. Its powers include retracting his body into his saucer-like helmet, launchable pincer claw gloves, mentally controlling his helmet, a bladed ring and a gun on the saucer helmet, a mace ended staff, and a sword.
Shouri Beast  This monster appeared in episode 11. Its powers include high jumping, a mentally controlled spear that emits electric shocks, and flames from the left palm.
Ocarina Beast  This monster appeared in episode 12. Its powers include teleportation, a hypnotic ocarina that can turn into a harpoon, and a sword.
Boxer Beast  This monster appeared in episode 13. Its powers include a human disguise, a boxing glove for the left hand that can turn into a staff, invisibility, high jumping, and a sword.
Killer Beast  This monster appeared in episode 14. Its powers include a human disguise, a detachable floating head, a crescent bladed staff that emits electric shocks, high jumping, summoning fire, and a sword.
Shikake Beast  This monster appeared in episode 15. Its powers include a clubbed staff that emits electric shocks, a human disguise, turning into a rock, explosive mouth mist, a long tongue, and a sword with a gun on the handle.
Maboroshi Beast  This monster appeared in episode 16. Its powers include a human disguise, transparency, retracting into his cloak, a mentally controlled spear, mirages, face ramming, and a sword.
Magma Beast  This monster appeared in episode 17. Its powers include a spear, fire manipulation, teleportation, lava sparks from the head, and a sword.
Same Beast  This monster appeared in episode 18. Its powers include teleportation, emitting white smoke, swimming, high jumping, invisibility, a staff with a club at the end, and a spiked sword.
Kataribe Beast  This monster appeared in episodes 19 and 20. Its powers include a human disguise, a mentally controlled staff with a club at the end that emits electricity, teleportation, high jumping, mouth bombs, and a sword.
Utsubo Beast  This monster appeared in episode 21. Its powers include sharp teeth, a staff with a mace that emits electric shocks, high jumping, teleportation, and a sword.
Shinigami Beast  This monster appeared in episode 22. Its powers include a human disguise, illusions, possession, high jumping, a scythe that can turn into a sword, and an explosive levitating cloak.
Nimen Beast  This monster appeared in episode 23. Its powers include a human disguise, teleportation, and an explosive spear.
Virus Beast  This monster appeared in episode 24. Its powers include a human disguise, energy sapping virus mouth mist, beetles with energy sapping virus mouth mist and can explode, gliding, a pitch fork, mouth webs, and a sword.
Nikui Beast  This monster appeared in episode 25. Its powers include a human disguise, telekinesis, a hooked staff that can emit hot sparks, and a sword that emits electric shocks.
Keiki Beast  This monster appeared in episode 26. Its powers include a human disguise, telekinesis, teleportation, super speed, high jumping, a mentally controlled ax, and a sword.
Uragiri Beast  This monster appeared in episode 27. Its powers include a glaive and a high resistance to pain.
Gakuen Beast  This monster appeared in episode 28. Its powers include teleportation, a human disguise, throwing giant explosive leaves, spawning athletes, and a sword.
Heiki Beast  This monster appeared in episode 29. Its powers include a human disguise, a shoulder energy cannon, a sword, a laser rifle, and explosive throwing knives.
Henshin Beast  This monster appeared in episode 30. Its powers include a human disguise, a glaive, high jumping, dividing into four gunmen, teleportation, and a mummy disguise with explosive constricting bandages.
Kodai Beast  This monster appeared in episode 31. Its powers include super strength, a spear, summoning flying rocks, and a sword.
Jekyll-Hyde Beast  This monster appeared in episode 32. Its powers include a human disguise, an ax that contains a sword, invisibility, and levitation.
Shunkan Beast  This monster appeared in episode 33. Its powers include teleportation, a mentally controlled glaive, shoulder shields, and a sword.
Hyakume Beast  This monster appeared in episode 34. Its powers include teleportation, a high heat resistance, telekinesis, a coiling tongue that emits electric shocks, a spear, and a sword.
Washi Beast  This monster appeared in episode 35. Its powers include gliding, high jumping, a spear, illusions, signal jamming, arrestors, and a sword.
Bunri Beast  This monster appeared in episode 36. Its powers include splitting into two different monsters, constricting electric tentacles, summoning vines, and a club that can turn into a sword.
Kuma Beast  This monster appeared in episode 37. Its powers include a human disguise, a scythe, high jumping, and a jagged sword.
Asura Beast  This monster appeared in episode 38. Its powers include swimming, a human disguise, a staff with a torch at the end, teleportation, an electric cloth, and a sword.
Doll Beast  This monster appeared in episode 39. Its powers include converting into a doll armed with a mouth gun, a rake staff, levitation, telepathy, doll bombs, mouth mist, a detachable head, teleportation, high jumping, and a sword.
Yogen Beast  This monster appeared in episode 40. Its powers include foresight, a human disguise, a trident that can turn into a sword, teleportation, and levitation.
Anahori Beast  This monster appeared in episode 41. Its powers include burrowing, shovel claws for hands, a nose drill, a forked staff, fast sliding, and a sword.
Mukuro Beast  This monster appeared in episode 42. Its powers include high jumping, a staff, summoning electric triangles and fissures, and a sword.
Reikai Beast  This monster appeared in episode 43. Its powers include using souls as a human disguise with extending arms, energy draining eye bolts, telekinesis, teleportation, a pitch fork, high jumping, reviving dead Makai beasts, and a sword.
Ankou Beast  This monster appeared in episode 44. Its powers include an extending head probe with knockout gas, teleportation, eye beams that keep creatures asleep, a sickle staff, and a sword.
Yukai Beast  This monster appeared in episode 45. Its powers include teleportation, a trident, a human disguise, and high jumping.
Present Beast  This monster appeared in episode 46. Its powers include a mentally controlled spear that emits electric shocks and can turn into a machine gun, invisibility, high jumping, and a sword.
Kenkyaku Beast  This monster appeared in episode 47. Its powers include a human disguise, the magic sword, high jumping, and telekinesis.
BEM Sasori  This monster appeared in episode 48. Its powers include a throwing knife, a launch able right arm pincer claw, high jumping, and a sword.


== Episodes ==
Vision (幻夢, Genmu) (Original Airdate: March 4, 1983)
Spirit World New Town (魔界ニュータウン, Makai Nyū Taun) (Original Airdate: March 11, 1983)
A Promise With Kumiko (久美子との約束, Kumiko to no Yakusoku) (Original Airdate: March 18, 1983)
The Microcomputer Investigation (マイコン指名手配, Maikron Shimeitehai) (Original Airdate: March 25, 1983)
Yohko of the Harbor Doesn't Forget the Melody of Love (港のヨーコは愛のメロディを忘れない, Minato no Yōko wa Ai no Merodi o Wasurenai) (Original Airdate: April 1, 1983)
The Small Life Flying Through the Forest of the Battlefield (戦場の森をかける小さな命, Senjō no Mori o Kakeru Chiisa na Inochi) (Original Airdate: April 8, 1983)
Who is the Me Floating in the Mirror!? (鏡の中に浮かぶ私は誰れ!?, Kagami no Naka ni Ukabu Watashi wa Dare!?) (Original Airdate: April 15, 1983)
The Comeback Salmon Revived by the Lutaceous River (泥の河は甦える カムバック サーモン, Dorono Kawa wa Yomegaeru Kamubakku Sāmon) (Original Airdate: April 22, 1983)
The Surprise House is at Vision Town, Address 0 (ビックリハウスは幻夢町0番地, Bikkuri Hausu wa Genmu Machi Zero Banchi) (Original Airdate: April 29, 1983)
Vision Castle – Chase the Shadow of the Tokyo Express (幻夢城 – 東京 エキスプレスの影を追え, Genmu Shiro – Tōkyō Ekisupuresu no Kage o Oe) (Original Airdate: May 6, 1983)
He Came From the Dark Nebula, the Strongest Villain, Fighter (暗黒星雲から来た 最強の悪役ファイター, Ankoku Seiun Kara Kita Saikyō no Akuyaku Faitā) (Original Airdate: May 13, 1983)
An Alien's Smile; Operation My Friend (異星人のほほえみ マイフレンド作戦, Iseijin no Hohoemi Mai Furendo Sakusen) (Original Airdate: May 20, 1983)
Strength is Love; The Heroes Set Off (強さは愛だ 英雄たちの旅立ち, Tsuyosa wa Ai da Eiyū-tachi no Tabidachi) (Original Airdate: May 27, 1983)
The Billionaire Who's Scared of Recurring Nightmares (連続夢魔におびえる億万長者, Renzoku Muma ni Obieru Okumanchōja) (Original Airdate: June 3, 1983)
The Island of the Sea-Rumbling Device (海鳴りの仕掛島, Uminari no Shikake Shima) (Original Airdate: June 10, 1983)
The Dangerous Hit Song Sung by the Pretty Girl (美少女歌手が歌う危険なヒットソング, Bishōjo Kashu ga Utau Kiken na Hitto Songu) (Original Airdate: June 17, 1983)
The Wondrous Extradimensional Trip of the New Model Double-Decker Bus (新型二階だてバスのふしぎな異次元旅行, Shingata Nikai Date Basu no Fushigi na I-jigen Ryokō) (Original Airdate: June 24, 1983)
It's Summer! It's the Sea! The Meteor Group Who Attacks Izu Peninsula (夏だ! 海だ! 伊豆半島を襲うメテオの群, Natsu da! Umi da! Izuhantō o Osō Meteo no Gun) (Original Airdate: July 1, 1983)
The Mysterious Girl Who Stands Alone on Makyō Cape (魔境岬に一人立つ神秘の少女, Makyō Misaki ni Hitori Tatsu Shinpi no Shōjo) (Original Airdate: July 8, 1983)
The Prism Desert Island That Calls the Stormy Seas (荒波が呼ぶ七色水晶の孤島, Aranami ga Yobu Shichishoku Suishō no Kotō) (Original Airdate: July 15, 1983)
The Secret Room's Fang – Lily Likes a Mystery (密室の牙・リリィはミステリーがお好き, Misshitsu no Kiba – Ririi wa Misuterī ga O-suki) (Original Airdate: July 22, 1983)
The Temptation to Heaven That Attacks the Tennis Player (テニスプレーヤーを襲う天国への誘惑, Tenisu Purēyā o Osō Tengoku e no Yūwaku) (Original Airdate: July 29, 1983)
Fear of the Copy Era; Big Gathering of Clone Humans (コピー時代の恐怖 そっくり人間大集合, Kopī Jidai no Kyōfu Sokkuri Ningen Dai Shūgō) (Original Airdate: August 5, 1983)
The Japan Lazy Person Disease Transported by the Insect Hurricane (昆虫ハリケーンが運んだ日本なまけ者病, Konchū Harikēn ga Hakonda Nihon Namakemono Byō) (Original Airdate: August 19, 1983)
Tears in a Demon's Eye – An Angel's Tears – Papa's Help is Coming (鬼の目に涙・天使の涙・パパ助けに来て, Oni no Me ni Namida – Tenshi no Namida – Papa Tasuke ni Kite) (Original Airdate: August 26, 1983)
The Trap of Anger; The Great Makeup War (憎しみの罠 メイクアップ大戦争, Nikushimi no Wana Meikuappu Dai Sensō) (Original Airdate: September 2, 1983)
The Treacherous Skies; The Fugitive From the Dark Jail (裏切りの空 暗黒刑務所からの逃亡者, Uragiri no Sora Ankoku Keimusho Kara no Tōbōsha) (Original Airdate: September 9, 1983)
The Campus is an 80m Wind Speed Violent Storm (キャンパスは風速80Mの猛烈ストーム, Kyanpasu wa Sōsoku Hachijū Mētā no Mōretsu Sutōmu) (Original Airdate: September 16, 1983)
Who is the Enemy? The Hot-Blooded Man Who Targets the Wilderness (敵は誰だ? 荒野をめざす熱血児, Teki wa Dare da? Areno o Mezasu Nekketsuji) (Original Airdate: September 23, 1983)
The Abandoned Children; Transforming Mama (捨てられる子供たち 変身するママ, Suterareru Kodomo-tachi Henshin Suru Mama) (Original Airdate: September 30, 1983)
Miyuki, Now? The Wandering Illusion Crystal (みゆきは今? さまよえる幻のクリスタル, Miyuki wa Ima? Samayoeru Maboroshi no Kurisutaru) (Original Airdate: October 7, 1983)
The Vision Dream Device Orange and a Lullaby! (幻夢じかけのオレンジと子守唄!, Genmu Jikake no Orenji to Komoriuta!) (Original Airdate: October 14, 1983)
An Instant Trip! Inside the Vision Castle are Bizarre Flowers in Full Bloom (瞬間旅行! 幻夢城内は怪奇の花ざかり, Shunkan Ryokō! Genmu Jōnai wa Kaiki no Hanazakari) (Original Airdate: October 21, 1983)
The Hair-Raising Spirit is the Guide to the Ghost World (総毛立つ幽鬼は死霊界への案内人, Sōkedatsu Yūki wa Shiryō Kai e no Annai Hito) (Original Airdate: October 28, 1983)
If You Fall, Stand up, Den! Love is the Radiance of Life (倒れたら立ちあがれ電! 愛は生命の輝き, Taoretara Tachiagare Den! Ai wa Seimei no Kagayaki) (Original Airdate: November 4, 1983)
The Iga Warrior Team's Z Flag Rises in the Cloudy Space Sky (風雲の宇宙海にイガ戦士団のZ旗あがる, Fūun no Uchū Umi ni Iga Senshi Dan no Zetto Hata Agaru) (Original Airdate: November 11, 1983)
The Bear-Hunting Grandpa Saw the Wondrous Poison Flower (不思議な毒花を熊狩りじいさんは見た, Fushigi na Doku Hana o Kumagari Jiisan wa Mita) (Original Airdate: November 18, 1983)
Crazy Whispering Coup d'état, Visions of Dark Clouds (乱心ささやきクーデター暗雲の幻夢城, Ranshin Sasayaki Kūdetā An'un no Genmu jo) (Original Airdate: November 25, 1983)
The Doll Knows the Wounds of the Iga Warrior's Heart (人形は知っているイガ戦士の心の傷を, Ningyō wa Shitte Iru Iga Senshi no Kokoro no Kizu o) (Original Airdate: December 2, 1983)
The Fiery Car Chase, the Great Promise to Tear Bonds of Love (炎のカーチェイス 愛の絆を裂く大予言, Honō no Kā Cheisu Ai no Kizuna o Saku Dai Kanegoto) (Original Airdate: December 9, 1983)
Phoenix!! Return to the Genmu World (不死鳥よ! 逆噴射の幻夢界へ舞いもどれ, Fushichō yo! Gyakufunsha no Genmukai e Maimodore) (Original Airdate: December 16, 1983)
The Crimson Youth of the Female Warrior Who Ran Through the Battlefield (戦場を駆けぬけた女戦士の真赤な青春, Senjō o Kakenuketa Onna Senshi no Makka na Seishun) (Original Airdate: December 23, 1983)
The Tears of a Mother and Child's Love Flow Down the Road to Heaven (母と子の愛の涙が天国への道に流れる, Haha to Ko no Ai no Namida ga Tengoku e no Michi ni Nagareru) (Original Airdate: December 30, 1983)
The Midnight Cinderella is Full of the Aroma of Roses (バラの香りに満ちた真夜中のシンデレラ, Bara no Kaori ni Michita Mayonaka no Shinderera) (Original Airdate: January 6, 1984)
The Audition's Trap; The Big Little Child Star (オーディションの罠 ちびっ子大スター, Ōdishon no Wana Chibikko Dai Sutā) (Original Airdate: January 13, 1984)
The Birthday Promise; The Sky Cloud That Draws a Dream to the Heavens (誕生日の約束 大空に夢をえがく飛行雲, Tanjōbi no Yakusoku Ōzora ni Yume o Egaku Hikō Kumo) (Original Airdate: January 20, 1984)
The Older Brother and Younger Sister Who Wish For Happiness; Sparks Fall, Holy Sword, Evil Sword (幸福をねがう兄と妹 火花散る正剣邪剣, Kōfuku o Negau Ani to Imōto Hibana Chiru Seiken Jaken) (Original Airdate: January 27, 1984)
Mimi (ミミー, Mimī) (Original Airdate: February 3, 1984)
Gamagon (ガマゴン, Gamagon) (Original Airdate: February 10, 1984)
Umibozu (海坊主, Umibōzu) (Original Airdate: February 17, 1984)
Sekisha – Jouchaku (赤射・蒸着, Sekisha – Jōchaku) (Original Airdate: February 24, 1984)


== Cast ==
Den Iga  Hiroshi Watari
Lily  Yumiko Furuya
Retsu Ichijouji  Kenji Ohba
Mimi  Wakiko Kano
Qom  Toshiaki Nishizawa
Marin  Kyoko Nashiro
Tsukiko Hoshino  Aiko Tachibana
Kojiro Oyama   Masayuki Suzuki
Kappei Suzuki  Gozo Soma
Chiaki Suzuki  Midori Nakagawa
Chie Suzuki  Yukari Aoki
Akira Suzuki  Katsuya Koiso
Miyuki  Sumiko Kakizaki
Bell Helen  Yuki Yajima
Keith/Boxer Beast  Toshimichi Takahashi (Episode 13)
Moore  Isamu Shimizu
Saint  Takeshi Watabe
Denichiro Iga  Tsunehiko Kamijo (in flashback) (Episodes 13, 20, 35, 49 and 51)
Yuhko Iga  Yukiko Yoshino (Played as Keiko Yoshino) (in flashback) (Episodes 35, 49 and 51)
Voicer  Sonny Chiba (in flashback) (Episode 15)
Hunter Killer  Michiro Iida (in flashback) (Episode 15)
Demon King Psycho  Shōzō Iizuka
Doctor Polter  Hitomi Yoshioka
General Gyrer  Satoshi Kurihara
Reider  Mitsuo Ando (Episodes 34–50)
Umibōzu  Kazuyoshi Yamada
Narrator  Issei Masamune
San Dorva  Ken Nishida (in flashback) (Episode 15)
Shinigami Beast (human form)  Machiko Soga (Episode 22)


== Songs ==
Opening theme"Space Sheriff Sharivan" (宇宙刑事シャリバン, Uchū Keiji Shariban)
Lyrics  Keisuke Yamakawa
Composition and Arrangement  Michiaki Watanabe
Artist  Akira KushidaEnding theme"Tsuyosa wa Ai da" (強さは愛だ, "Strength is Love")
Lyrics  Keisuke Yamakawa
Composition and Arrangement  Michiaki Watanabe
Artist  Akira Kushida


== References ==