Budu (sauce)

Budu (Jawi: بودو; Thai: บูดู, RTGS: budu, pronounced [būːdūː]) is an anchovies sauce and one of the best known fermented seafood products in Kelantan, Terengganu in Malaysia, southern Thailand and Natuna islands in Indonesia (where it is called pedek or pedok) and South Sumatra,
Bangka island and Western Kalimantan of Indonesia (where it is called rusip). It is mentioned in A Grammar and Dictionary of the Malay language, With a Preliminary Dissertation, Volume 2, By John Crawfurd, published in 1852.


== History ==
It is traditionally made by mixing anchovies and salt in a ratio ranging from 2:1 to 6:1 and allowing the mix to ferment for 140 to 200 days. It is used as a flavouring and is normally eaten with fish, rice, and raw vegetables.
It is similar to the patis in Philippines, ketjap-ikan in Indonesia, ngapi in Burma, nuoc mam in Vietnam,  ishiru or shottsuru in Japan, colombo-cure in Indian subcontinent, yeesu in China, and aekjeot in Korea.
The fish product is the result of hydrolysis of fish and microbial proteases. The flavor and aroma of Budu are produced by the action of proteolytic microorganisms surviving during the fermentation process. Palm sugar and tamarind are usually added to promote a browning reaction, resulting in a dark brown hue. The ratio of fish to salt is key to the final desired product. Different concentrations of salt influences the microbial and enzymatic activity, resulting in different flavours. The microorganisms found during Budu production are generally classified as halophilic. The microorganisms play important roles in protein degradation and flavour and aroma development.
Budu is a traditional condiment among the ethnic Malays of east coast of Peninsular Malaysia, particularly in the state of Kelantan and Terengganu. Budu has been declared a Malaysian heritage food by the Malaysian Department of National Heritage. Even ethnic Chinese in Kelantan are involved in Budu production. Anchovy and its products like budu are high in protein and uric acid, thus not recommended for people with gout. The uric acid content in anchovies, however, is lower than that in tuna.Budu made from anchovy sauce has shown potential as an anti-cancer agent.Budu also as a food sourced from fish have potential as brain food.A new form of budu in powder form has been developed by a Politeknik Kota Bharu (PKB) student. This allows for easier storage and transport as it is lighter and less prone to bottle breakage. 


== See also ==

Myeolchi-jeot – Korean salted and fermented anchovies
List of fish sauces
List of dried foods


== References ==


== External links ==
(in Malay) Kehebatan budu Kelantan
The Unique Cina Kampung, The Star online