Del Valle High School (El Paso, Texas)

Del Valle High is a public high school located on the southeast side of El Paso, Texas. DV, as it is commonly called, is part of the Ysleta Independent School District, serving about 2,000 students in grades 9 to 12. Its feeder schools are Valley View Middle School and a quarter percent of Camino Real Middle School. Mr.Acuna took over as  Principal at Del Valle High School at the beginning of the 2015-2016 school year. As of 2011, Del Valle is considered a "recognized school" by the TEA association.
In 2013 The Texas UIL changed the areas schools 4A to 5A and 5A to 6A division, as of 2014 Del Valle High School is in the UIL 5A. Del Valle has had much success in their athletic programs, most of their success coming from their boys soccer program. As of 2008, they have won two Texas State Championships, although soccer has been successful in recent years, other sports such as baseball & softball are in the playoffs year after year. Football is another program that also goes to the playoffs every season under Coach Jesse Perales and is a powerhouse in the 2-4A (Now 2-5A) district. Coach Valerie Salazar-Hairston was honored by The El Paso Times as the Girls All City Track and Field Coach of the Year [9/2010]. Coach Salazar-Hairston led the Conquistadores to their first District Championship and swept the District with all three teams (Freshman, JV and Varsity).
Del Valle also has an award-winning marching band that has made it to the UIL Texas State Marching Contest 3 times: 2003, 2005, and most recently 2009. The band is also considered one of El Paso's strong powerhouse. The program has been successful in the NMSU Tournament of Bands, in Las Cruces, NM. The program has also attended the BOA Regionals and Super Regionals in El Paso and San Antonio, Texas.The school opened in August 1987 and is recently celebrating its twenty years. Located very close to the Mexican border, the population of Del Valle is mostly Hispanic. DV graduated its first class in June 1990.
During 2006-2008, Del Valle High School had new additions built on to it: New Roofing, new Tennis Courts, a new Track around the football field, a three-story state of the art science wing, a band and musical arts wing and a modern field house to accommodate the growing, successful athletics programs.
Conquest Journal is a Video Technology Program to keep students informed about whats going on at their school. The program is very successful and popular amongst the students and faculty.DVHS also offers Multinational/Multimedia Business Magnet School within its campus. This Magnet program offers informative information for students that want to pursue a career with business and marketing. Some topics covered in this group are entrepreneurship, finance, marketing and business information tech.


== Clubs, groups and sports offered at DV ==
Astronomy Club
AVID
Band
Baseball
Basketball
Cheerleading
Choir
Conquest Journal (Video/Audio Production)
Conquerettes
Cross Country
Dance
DECA
Drama Club
Debate Team
Dual Language
Future Business Leaders of America (FBLA)
Family, Career and Community Leaders of America (FCCLA)
Football
French National Honor Society (FNHS)
Fuego
Golf
Guitar Club
Law Enforcement Club
Multinational Business Academy (Magnet)
Math Team
National Art Honor Society (NAHS)
National English Honor Society (NEHS)
National Technical Honor Society (NTHS)
National Honor Society
Orchestra
Piano
JROTC
Soccer
Softball
Spanish National Honor Society (SNHS)
Student Council
Swimming
Tennis
Theater Club
Track & Field
Valor
Volleyball
Wrestling


== References ==