Deer Valley High School (Glendale, Arizona)

Deer Valley High School is a public high school located in Glendale, Arizona, part of the Deer Valley Unified School District. The school opened its doors in 1980 with an initial enrollment of 750 students. Today, the campus is housed on more than 60 acres (240,000 m2) with a current enrollment of about 1,900 students. Deer Valley High School has been recognized for student achievements in a range of academics and athletics. The school is run by over 100 teachers, five counselors, one psychologist, four administrators, and numerous other support staff with Kim Crooks as the current principal. The 2011 renovation was the first major renovations to the school since its 1980 construction.


== Athletics ==
Deer Valley High School offers all Arizona Interscholastic Association-sanctioned sports as of the 2011-2012 school year (with the addition of badminton across the district). Since 1985, the school has won 11 state titles: three in softball; two in girls' cross country; and one each in boys' track and field, boys' tennis, baseball, boys' volleyball, girls' basketball, and girls' track and field in 2016.


=== Fall sports ===
Cross country
Football
Golf
Spiritline (girls')
Swimming and diving
Volleyball (girls')
Badminton


=== Winter sports ===
Basketball (boys')
Basketball (girls')
Soccer (boys')
Soccer (girls')
Wrestling


=== Spring sports ===
Baseball
Softball
Tennis
Track and field
Volleyball (boys')


== Clubs ==
Academic Decathlon
Art Club
Best Buddies
Board Game Club
Broadcasting
Chess Club
Christian Club on Campus
Close-Up Government
Cosplay Club
DECA
Drama/Thespian Club
Drill Team/ROTC
FBLA
Fellowship of Christian Athletes
IMPACT/FCCLA
Improv
Interact
Integral
International Club
Invisible Children Club
Key Club
Mock Trial
National Honor Society
Newspaper (The Skyhawk Flight)
P31 Bible Study
Peer Mediators
Physics Club
Quest
Quill & Scroll
Science Club
Society of Female Scholars
Spanish Club
Spanish Honor Society
Stagecraft
Student Government
Yearbook


== Band ==
The current band program offers three concert bands (Wind Ensemble, Symphonic Winds and Symphonic Band), (formally) three jazz bands (Performance Jazz Ensemble, Advanced Jazz Ensemble and Jazz Ensemble), several Jazz Combos, Marching Band, Orchestra, Percussion and Colorguard.
The Deer Valley Performance Jazz Ensemble was selected to perform at the 60th Annual Midwest Clinic in 2006. The Performance Jazz Ensemble has won three national contests (2002 and 2006 Conn-Selmer Big Bad Voodoo Daddy Jazz Contest, and the 2006 Music and Arts Spring Swing Competition), has been national runners-up twice (2003 and 2004, Conn-Selmer Big Bad Voodoo Daddy Jazz Contest), and was featured at the 2005 and 2006 Arizona Music Educator's Conference.The Marching Band has performed in the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade (1994), the Tournament of Roses Parade (1994), and the Fiesta Bowl National Pageant of Bands.
The school hosted its own jazz festival and hosts the DVUSD marching bands exhibition.
The 2006-2007 Marching Band received a rating of Superior with Distinction at the 2006 State Marching Festival. The Performance Jazz Ensemble was invited to perform at the 2007 Western International Band Clinic in Seattle.
On October 20, 2007 the Marching Band received the Rating of Superior at the Arizona State University Band Day, as well as awards for Outstanding Music, Visual, GE and Auxiliary.
The Performance Jazz Ensemble most recently had a work commissioned by Fred Sturm called "Skyhawk", published by the Lorenz Corporation.
The Deer Valley Skyhawk Marching Band won the 2014 Division II AZ State Championships with a performance score of 85.


== Notable alumni ==
Paul Boyer, member of Arizona House of Representatives
Khristopher Davis, Major League Baseball player
Bob Howry, former MLB player (Chicago White Sox, Boston Red Sox, Cleveland Indians, Chicago Cubs, Arizona Diamondbacks and San Francisco Giants)
Ty Murray, professional bull rider; married to Jewel 2008–2014.
Nate Ruess, lead singer of Fun., formerly of The Format
Jamie Varner, state runner-up wrestler; retired professional mixed martial artist; former World Extreme Cagefighting (WEC) Lightweight Champion; competed for the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC)
Richard Wilson (Also known as rikah69), professional Fortnite Battle Royale player ranked #400 on the West Coast


== References ==