Doosan Group

Doosan Group (Korean: 두산그룹; Hanja: 斗山그룹) is a South Korean conglomerate company. In 2009, the company was placed 471st in the Fortune Global 500. It has been included in the Forbes Global 2000 companies from 2007. It is the parent company of ŠKODA power. Doosan was ranked 4th among the "World's Best 40 Companies 2009" list in BusinessWeek, the U.S. economics magazine, in October 2009.


== History ==
The Doosan Group was founded in 1896. The company began as the Park Seung Jik Store in 1896 in Baeogai (now Jongno 4-ga, Seoul). Since then, Doosan has developed into a multinational conglomerate, with particular emphasis on consumer goods, manufacturing and the trading and construction sectors.
The company's acquisitions include Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction (formerly Korea Heavy Industries and Construction, a heavy industry company specializing in power and desalination plants) in 2001, Koryeo Industrial Development in 2004 and Doosan Infracore (formerly Daewoo Heavy Industries & Machinery, a company specializing in construction machinery) in 2005.
In 2006, Doosan acquired the boiler engineering company Mitsui Babcock UK (renamed Doosan Babcock) and Kvaerner IMGB, the largest casting and forging company in Romania. In 2007, Doosan acquired the construction machinery company Bobcat USA, the world's largest supplier of small construction equipment. Post acquisition of Bobcat USA into Doosan Infracore, one of the Doosan Group's subsidiary companies specializing in medium and large construction machinery, the Doosan Group became the world's seventh largest supplier of construction machinery. Doosan currently has 41,400 employees in 38 countries.


== Key business areas ==

Doosan's core businesses are based on ISB (Infrastructure Support Business). Doosan's Infrastructure Support Businesses are made up of five subsidiaries: Doosan Corporation, Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction, Doosan Infracore, Doosan Engineering & Construction and Doosan Engine. These subsidiaries provide electrical power, desalinated drinking water, construction equipment, advanced machinery, defense supplies, houses, highways and bridges, chemical processing equipment and industrial engines.


== Companies ==
Doosan Corporation (Holding Company)

Doosan Corporation Electro-Materials supplies the main materials for PCB, a core part for electronics, including CCL (Copper Clad Laminate) and OLED materials (illuminating and common layer for fluorescence phosphorescence.)
Doosan Corporation Industrial Vehicle is a manufacturer of global logistics equipment, as well as engine-type forklifts and electronic forklifts.
Doosan Corporation Mottrol develops and produces hydraulic components for construction equipment and defense systems.
Doosan Corporation Information & Communications provides customers including Doosan affiliates with IT consulting, system setup, business system operation and IT infrastructure operation.
Doosan Corporation Fuel Cell: Doosan Corporation Fuel Cell has a full lineup of products, from power generation to residential use, based on its proprietary fuel cell technologies. Doosan bought U.S. fuel cell maker ClearEdge Power, a stationary fuel cell manufacturer based in Silicon Valley.
Doosan Corporation Glonet operates in logistics in the overall and bio industry, including the development of new bio-materials such as medical emulsifiers.
Doosan Corporation Doota Duty Free: Doota duty-free shop is Korea's first duty-free shop to provide late-night shopping experience, differentiated unique shopping items and service. From luxury fashion and beauty brands to unique Korean fashion and D-Mart, a lifestyle-concept store, Doota duty-free shop features 500 different brands.ISB (Infrastructure Support Business)

Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction, established in 1962, develops thermal power plant, nuclear power plant, seawater desalination plant, casting and forging and construction in the Middle East, Asia, Europe and North America with a total of $9.6 billion in revenue in 2012. Doosan has built over 400 nuclear, thermal and combined-cycle power plants. Doosan has proprietary technologies for all three major desalination types: Multi Stage Flash (MSF), Multi Effect Distillation (MED) and Reverse Osmosis (RO). The company has acquired Romania's largest casting and forging manufacturer, the boiler manufacturer Mitsui Babcock, and a Czech-based turbine manufacturer, Skoda Power. It has also established desalination R&D centers in Tampa, U.S., Damman, Saudi Arabia and Birmingham, UK.
Doosan Infracore produces construction equipment, engines, attachments, and utility equipment such as air compressors.
Doosan Engineering & Construction, established in 1960, is in the field of civil engineering, construction, CPE and HRSG(Heat Recovery Steam Generator).
American Engineering Services Inc. (currently, Doosan Hydro Technology Inc.) in 2005.
IMGB (currently, Doosan IMGB) in 2006. Doosan IMGB is the largest casting and forging company in Europe with headquarters in Romania.
Doosan Babcock Energy in 2006
Bobcat Company in 2007
Advanced Technology Lubben (ATL) in 2008. ATL is located in Lubben, outside Berlin(Germany) and has the original technology to support the production of material handling equipment for warehouses and airports.
Moxy Engineering acquired in 2008 and changed name to Doosan Moxy AS. A manufacturer of articulated haulers (dump trucks) based in Norway. As of 2011, marketed solely as Doosan, with the Moxy name dropped.
Skoda Power in 2009, a manufacturer and supplier of SKODA design steam turbines from 5 MW to 1,200 MW, machine halls and of customer services for fossil and nuclear power plants, combined cycles, co-generation and incineration plants.
ENPURE: in 2012 Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction acquired ENPURE, a U.K. based water/wastewater treatment company with core technologies and patents for removing foreign matters from source water and seawater, as well as water/wastewater treatment and design of desalination facilities.CSB (Consumer & Service Business)

Oricom provides services for marketing brands including planning, creative, brand consulting, media, promotion and online marketing.
Hancomm is a representative general advertisement agency in Korea, has been leading the development and growth of the advertisement industry along with Oricom.
Neoplux is a private equity firm, offering local and overseas companies investment and consulting.
Doosan Tower is a shopping mall with more than 550 fashion stores, attracting 20 million visitors each year.
Doosan Bears, formed in January 1982, the first year of the professional league in Korea, was the country's first professional baseball team.
Doosan Cuvex operates the Ladena golf club in Chuncheon, Korea.
Doosan Magazine was in 1996 the first fashion magazine in Korea, followed by magazines like GQ, Vogue, Vogue Girl, Allure and W.Auxiliary Organizations

Yonkang Foundation, established in 1978 in honor of the company's first chairperson the late Yonkang Too Pyung Park, is involved in scholarships, R&D financing, overseas training for teachers, educational welfare and sharing books.
Doosan Art Center supports young artists in its facilities, including Yonkang Hall, Space111 and Doosan Gallery.
DLI-Yonkangwon: The DLI (Doosan Leadership Institute) hosts educational programs including workshops, forums, and seminars for employees of the group.


== See also ==
Doosan Corporation
List of South Korean companies
Economy of South Korea


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction
Doosan Infracore
Doosan Engineering & Construction