Yeshiva Rabbi Chaim Berlin

Yeshiva Rabbi Chaim Berlin or Yeshivas Rabbeinu Chaim Berlin (Hebrew: יְשִׁיבַת רַבֵּינוּ חַיִּים בֶּרלִין‎) is an American Haredi Lithuanian-type boys' and men's yeshiva in Brooklyn, New York.  
Chaim Berlin consists of a preschool, a yeshiva ketana (elementary school), a mesivta (high school), a college-level beth midrash, and Kollel Gur Aryeh, its post-graduate kollel division.


== History ==
The school was established in 1904 as Yeshiva Tiferes Bachurim in Brownsville, Brooklyn, by Jews who moved there from the Lower East Side of New York City, thus making it the oldest yeshiva in Kings County. At the suggestion of Meir Berlin (Bar-Ilan), it was renamed for his brother, Chaim Berlin, a rabbi who served in Valozhyn, the place where some of the yeshiva's founders were from.Jacob Rutstein, a real estate developer, businessman and, philanthropist, was essential in establishing Chaim Berlin Yeshiva in the United States. An article in the Brooklyn Eagle, on March 16, 1942, described one of the many donations he acquired for the institution, stating that “$2,000 was raised in outside gifts by Jacob Rutstein who recently returned from Florida.” On December 11, 1944, another article appeared in the Brooklyn Eagle which stated, “Yesivah Rabbi Chaim Berlin, one of the largest Orthodox Jewish institutions of learning in the country, is dedicating its new seven-story building at Stone and Pitkin Ave... The opening ceremonies were attended by more than 3000 persons. Jacob Rutstein, chairman of the dedication committee, announced that $25,000 had been donated by those present towards the new $1,000,000 building.”On December 29, 1944, another article appeared stating the following about Rutstein.

Our congratulations to Jacob Rutstein for his constant activity on organizing activities for the advancement of orthodox Jewish secular and religious education. Outstanding in his philanthropic activities is his recent purchase of the seven-story $1,000,000 building at 350 Stone Ave. for the Mesivtah and Yeshivah Rabbi Chaim Berlin in the hearts of Brownsville. Already the institution has been recognized by the State Board of Regents through the granting of a charter and 800 students are now enrolled. Of this number 150 are studying for the rabbinate. Also 200 of its students have come from all parts of this country and 62 are refugees driven from their homelands by Hitler. This has been a truly humanitarian endeavor on the part of Mr. Rutstein.
The focus of Chaim Berlin is to encourage as many students as possible to become rabbis and Talmudic scholars.


== Leadership ==

The founding rosh yeshiva, Yaakov Moshe Shurkin, served from 1936 until his death in 1963.Yitzchok Hutner joined the faculty during 1936-1937, and gave monthly lectures as rosh yeshiva from 1943 to 1980. In the late 1970s, a branch was opened in Jerusalem called Yeshiva Pachad Yitzchok (Fear of Isaac). The name is both a Biblical reference to Genesis 31:42, and named for Hutner's books on Jewish thought.After Hutner's death, the New York yeshiva was headed by his disciple Aaron Schechter, and the Jerusalem branch was headed by his son-in-law Yonason David.The position of mashgiach ruchani (spiritual supervisor) has been held by (among others) Avigdor Miller, Shlomo Freifeld, Shlomo Carlebach, and Shimon Groner.


== Divisions ==
Chaim Berlin consists of a preschool, a yeshiva ketana (elementary school), a mesivta (high school), a college-level beth midrash, and Kollel Gur Aryeh, its post-graduate kollel division. Total enrollment for all divisions approaches 2,000 students. The mesivta acts as a feeder school for the beth midrash.The yeshiva maintains a summer location, Camp Morris, in Sullivan County, New York. It is named after a former president of the yeshiva, Morris Meltzer.


== High Holy Days ==
Over 1,000 people attend services in Chaim Berlin on the High Holy Days.


== Controversies ==
Shlomo Carlebach served as mashgiach ruchani of the yeshiva under Hutner. When Hutner appointed Schechter and David to lead the yeshiva after him, they ultimately fired Carlebach from his position, as they viewed him as a challenge to their authority. Carlebach summoned them to a beth din (rabbinical court) headed by Moshe Feinstein. The summons was ignored, and the yeshiva was given a status of lo tzeis dinah. Many leading rabbis urged Hutner and Schechter to heed the summons of Feinstein, but they were ignored.


== Notable alumni ==
Notable alumni include many who served in rabbinic capacities throughout the world.

Shalom Z. Berger (born 1960), Senior Content Editor of the Koren Talmud Bavli
Shlomo Carlebach (1925–1994), former mashgiach ruchani of Yeshiva Rabbi Chaim Berlin
Yonasan Dovid David, co-rosh yeshiva of Yeshiva Rabbi Chaim Berlin
Yaakov Feitman, rabbi of Kehillas Bais Yehudah Tzvi, Cedarhurst, New York
Aharon Feldman (born 1932), rosh yeshiva of Ner Israel Rabbinical College
Shlomo Freifeld (1925–1990), founding rosh yeshiva of Yeshivas Shor Yoshuv
David Weiss Halivni (born 1927), rabbi
David Hartman (born 1931), American-Israeli rabbi and philosopher of contemporary Judaism, founder of the Shalom Hartman Institute.
Simcha Krauss (born 1937), retired rabbi of the Young Israel of Hillcrest, Queens, and leader of the Religious Zionists of America
David Lefkowitz, chaplain United States Marines
Aharon Lichtenstein (1933–2015), rosh yeshiva of Yeshivat Har Etzion, Alon Shevut, and rosh kollel of Yeshiva University's Gruss Kollel, Jerusalem
Yaakov Perlow (born 1931), the Novominsker Rebbe of Borough Park
Yechiel Perr (born 1935), rosh yeshiva of Yeshiva of Far Rockaway
Zvi Aryeh Rosenfeld (1922–1978), Polish–American rabbi and educator associated with the Breslov Hasidic movement
Nota Schiller (born 1937), rosh yeshiva of Ohr Somayach, Jerusalem
Ahron Soloveichik (1917–2001), taught at Yeshiva University, Hebrew Theological College and Brisk Rabbinical College
Pinchas Stolper (born 1931), former Executive Vice-President of the Orthodox Union and founder of NCSY
Noah Weinberg (1930–2009), co-founder of Yeshivas Ohr Somayach, Jerusalem; founder of Yeshivas Aish HaTorah
Yaakov Weinberg (1923–1999), rosh yeshiva of Ner Israel Rabbinical College
Yisroel Eliyahu Weintraub (1932–2010), rabbi


== See also ==

Yeshiva Torah Vodaas – another yeshiva in Brooklyn


== References ==


== External links ==
Hagadah of Yeshiva Rabbi Chaim Berlin
Yeshiva Rabbi Chaim Berlin at Greatschools.org
[1] Mesivta Rabbi Chaim Berlin
Harry Perkal (November 20, 2017). "Confessions Of A Chaim Berlin Yeshiva Graduate," The Forward.