Title: A Contraluz (Luz Casal album)
Aspects: {'A Contraluz'}

"A contraluz" (Backlight) is the sixth studio album of the Spanish female rock singer-songwriter Luz Casal, released in 1991, two years after her previous release. It's also her second album under Hispavox, her music label since 1989. This album, also produced by the Colombian Chucho Merchán, by Paco Trinidad and by herself confirms Casal's reputation as one of the best voices in the Spanish music scene. The commercial success of this album is highly related to the film High heels, directed by Pedro Almodovar, for which two songs from this album were included in its soundtrack.


== Style ==
In this album, Luz Casal maintains her rock side of her previous releases with strong guitars and powerful drums, in some of the songs such as "Tu orgullo", she even combines those vibes with country music sounds, but in general, the ballads keep on gaining more and more space in this album. As in the previous record, five songs were released as Maxi singles in this album, the first one was "Un pedazo de cielo" (A piece of heaven), which follows the usual style of the singer. The next single was "Es por ti" (It's for you) which is a cover of the song Boig per Tu, originally sung in Catalan language by the band Sau. The following singles from the album were all of them ballads, one of those was "Tal para cual" (Made for each other), but the most famous songs from this record were "Piensa en mi" (Think of me), and "Un año de amor" (A year of love).
"Piensa en mi" (Think of me) is a song which was originally composed by the Mexican bolero singer Agustín Lara in 1935 and that has been covered and performed by various Latin American artists during the 20th century. Luz Casal's version was used in the Almodovar's film High heels in a performance that was picturised in the image of a suffering Becky del Páramo, played by Marisa Paredes. The version that Luz Casal sung for that film was a surprise, both for many of her followers and for many musical critics because it was the first time that a rock singer dared to perform a bolero. Anyway, Casal's performance received a very positive response, praising the heartbreaking sensitivity the singer shows. The last single of the album, "Un año de amor" (A year of love) was also used in the same film, this time sensually picturised in the image of a transvestite Miguel Bosé. These songs would heavily influence the future repertoire of the performer in her following albums.


== Track List ==
"Un Pedazo de Cielo"/A Piece of Heaven (Luz Casal, Pablo Sycet, Tony Carmona) 4:58
"Se Verá"/It Remains to be Seen (Casal, Javier Monforte, Paco Trinidad) 4:45
"Todo Va Bien"/All is Well (John Parsons, Serge Mailliard, Casal, Sycet) 4:12
"A Mil Kilometros"/A Thousand Kilometers (Casal, Sycet, Monforte, Trinidad) 4:28
"Es Por Ti"/It's For You (Pep Sala, Carles Sabater, Joan Capdevilla) 4:43
"Tal Para Cual"/Made for Each Other (Carmen Santonja, Alvaro  De Cardenas) 4:04
"¿Que Día Es Hoy?"/What's Today? (Casal, Santoja, Cardenas) 5:00
"Es Mejor Que Tu Vayas"/It's Better That You Go" (Summers) 3:51
"Tu Orgullo"/Your Pride (Casal, Sycet, Carmona) 4:57
"Piensa en Mi"/Think of Me (Agustin Lara) 4:29
"Un Año De Amor"/A Year of Love 3:21


== Reception ==
The LP sold over 600,000 copies, receiving a six-times platinum certification.  This was due largely to the success of the singles "Piensa En Mi" and "Un Año de Amor"


== References ==


== External links ==
A contraluz in Luz Casal official website