Title: R24 (South Africa)
Aspects: {'R24'}

The R24 is a major East-West provincial route in the Gauteng and North West provinces that links OR Tambo International Airport with Rustenburg via Johannesburg, Krugersdorp and Magaliesburg. The process of renaming the streets and freeway that form the route from Krugersdorp eastward to OR Tambo International after anti-apartheid stalwart Albertina Sisulu was completed in 2013.[1]
After passing through Central Johannesburg and some of Johannesburg's eastern suburbs (a section maintained by the Johannesburg Roads Agency, a department of the City of Johannesburg), the route becomes a freeway outside Eastgate Shopping Centre in Bedfordview, a section which is maintained by the Gauteng Department of Roads and Transport, part of the Gauteng Provincial Government. This freeway section of the route intersects with the N3 and the N12 at Gillooly's Interchange. There are offramps that lead to Edenvale, and parts of Kempton Park, before the road ends in the vicinity of OR Tambo International Airport, at the R21 leading to Pretoria and Boksburg.


== Route ==


=== Gauteng ===
 The R24 begins at Johannesburg International Airport (OR Tambo International Airport) in the East Rand (Ekurhuleni), Gauteng.
It heads west as a freeway, beginning with an interchange with the R21, then heads south-west through the southern edge of Kempton Park (where it has a junction at Barbara Road - M59) and Edenvale (where it has a junction at Van Riebeeck Road, also called Edenvale Road - M37/52).
In Bedfordview (after The Edenvale off-ramp), the R24 joins the N12 Freeway from Mpumalanga westwards towards Johannesburg for about 2 km, with an e-toll gantry on that section of the national road (the only toll on the entire R24 Route) (there is no e-toll on the eastward side of the freeway). Many motorists have complained of the e-toll being positioned on the R24, as the R24 was initially meant to be a toll-free route for its entire length in which nobody would be charged for transporting from Johannesburg's Airport in Kempton Park to Johannesburg Central.Right after the e-toll, at the Gillooly's Interchange with the N3, the N12 co-joins the N3 Eastern Bypass southwards on the Johannesburg Ring Road, leaving R24 as the straight road west into Johannesburg. Just after the interchange with the N3 & N12, it passes north of the Eastgate Shopping Centre and crosses the border between the City Of Ekurhuleni and the City of Johannesburg and the R24 stops being a freeway.
It passes through some of Johannesburg's eastern suburbs in a south-westerly direction, including Bruma and Kensington, before passing into Johannesburg CBD and becomes two one-way streets (one going east as Albertina Sisulu Road, formerly Market Street, and the other west as Commissioner Street). The Carlton Centre, the tallest building in Africa, is located on Commissioner Street. Just before crossing under Johannesburg's M1 Freeway at Newtown, it intersects with the R41 Road (Main Reef Road). The R41 route is an alternative route to the R24 route as they both go west towards Roodepoort.
Next, the R24 runs west to Roodepoort. It passes through the Fordsburg, Mayfair, Mayfair West, Langlaagte North, Crosby, Industria (where it continues by a left & right turn) and Bosmont suburbs before it crosses the N1 Highway (Johannesburg Western Bypass, Johannesburg Ring Road) at the Maraisburg junction and enters Roodepoort. After passing through the Maraisburg and Florida suburbs, the R24 runs in a northwesterly direction through Roodepoort Central. At the Westgate suburb, the R24 leaves the City of Johannesburg Metropolitan Municipality and enters Krugersdorp in the Mogale City Local Municipality.
Through Krugersdorp, it first passes by Factoria before passing through the southern end of Krugersdorp CBD, where it intersects with the R28 Route. After Krugersdorp West, via a left turn, the R24 makes up the southern border of the Krugersdorp Game Reserve. It then heads north-west, crossing the N14 Highway, towards Magaliesburg, which is a holiday and weekend destination for people of Johannesburg And Pretoria. On this section, before Magaliesburg, it passes by the Tarlton International Raceway.


=== North West ===
After Magaliesburg in the Mogale City Local Municipality, the R24 leaves Gauteng and enters the North West Province in a northwesterly direction. It heads for Olifantsnek, where it meets the northern end of the R30 Route and bypasses the Kgaswane Mountain Reserve. After the Kgaswane Reserve, it crosses the N4 Platinum Highway and enters the City of Rustenburg. It meets the R104 just after crossing the Platinum Highway, marking its end. The entire section of the R24 in North-West Province was regarded as a national road in September 2012 and is now operated by SANRAL. 


== Geography ==


=== Street name ===
By October 2013, every street and freeway that makes up R24 from Johannesburg International Airport, Kempton Park, Ekurhuleni, through Johannesburg and Roodepoort, to Krugersdorp was officially named after Albertina Sisulu, with the exception being in the one-way-street section of Johannesburg, where the street for vehicles going westwards is named  Commissioner Street while the parallel street going the other direction is still named after Albertina Sisulu.
The use of the street name "Albertina Sisulu Road" ends in Krugersdorp East (coming from Roodepoort), at the junction with Coronation Street. From there, while being the road separating Luipaardsvlei from Krugersdorp CBD, it is known as Luipaard Street. After Krugersdorp CBD, it is known as Rustenburg Road for the remainder of its length, from Krugersdorp, through Magaliesburg, up to Olifantsnek Dam, where it enters Rustenburg.
As the R24 is known as the Albertina Sisulu Freeway in Ekurhuleni between Eastgate Shopping Centre and Johannesburg International Airport, the use of the name doesn't end there. The R21 is often also called the Albertina Sisulu Freeway, Particularly the section from the Johannesburg International Airport interchange north to the N1 Flying Saucer interchange near Centurion and Pretoria in City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality.


== References ==


== External links ==
Routes Travel Info