Title: Setophaga
Aspects: {'S. flavescens'}

Setophaga is a genus of birds of the New World warbler family Parulidae. It contains at least 33 species. The males in breeding plumage are often highly colorful. The Setophaga warblers are an example of adaptive radiation with the various species using different feeding techniques and often feeding in different parts of the same tree.
Most Setophaga species are long-range migrants, wintering in or near the New World tropics and seasonally migrating to breed in North America. In contrast, two Setophaga species, the palm warbler and yellow-rumped warbler, have winter ranges that extend along the Atlantic coast of North America as far north as Nova Scotia.


== Taxonomy ==
The genus Setophaga was introduced by the English naturalist William Swainson in 1827. The type species was subsequently designated by Swainson in the same year as the American redstart Setophaga ruticilla. The genus name is from Ancient Greek ses, "moth", and phagos, "eating".Genetic research has suggested that Dendroica and Setophaga should be merged. This change has been accepted by both the North American and South American Classification Committees of the American Ornithological Society and the IOC World Bird List. Most members of the genus as currently recognized were traditionally classified as the genus Dendroica, 29 species at the time of the merger. The only member of the genus Setophaga prior to the merger was the American redstart. As the name Setophaga (published in 1827) takes priority over Dendroica (published in 1842), those who accept the merger transfer all the species below to Setophaga.


== List of species ==
Plumbeous warbler, Setophaga plumbea
Elfin woods warbler, Setophaga angelae
Arrowhead warbler, Setophaga pharetra
Hooded warbler, Setophaga citrina
American redstart. Setophaga ruticilla
Kirtland's warbler, Setophaga kirtlandii
Cape May warbler, Setophaga tigrina
Cerulean warbler, Setophaga cerulea
Northern parula, Setophaga americana
Tropical parula, Setophaga pitiayumi
Magnolia warbler, Setophaga magnolia
Bay-breasted warbler, Setophaga castanea
Blackburnian warbler, Setophaga fusca
American yellow warbler, Setophaga petechia
Chestnut-sided warbler, Setophaga pensylvanica
Blackpoll warbler, Setophaga striata
Black-throated blue warbler, Setophaga caerulescens
Palm warbler, Setophaga palmarum
Olive-capped warbler, Setophaga pityophila
Pine warbler, Setophaga pinus
Yellow-rumped warbler, Setophaga coronata
Myrtle warbler, Setophaga coronata coronata
Audubon's warbler, Setophaga coronata auduboni
Black-fronted warbler, Setophaga coronata nigrifrons
Goldman's warbler, Setophaga coronata goldmani
Yellow-throated warbler, Setophaga dominica
Bahama warbler, Setophaga flavescens
Vitelline warbler, Setophaga vitellina
Prairie warbler, Setophaga discolor
Adelaide's warbler, Setophaga adelaidae
Barbuda warbler, Setophaga subita
Saint Lucia warbler, Setophaga delicata
Grace's warbler, Setophaga graciae
Black-throated grey warbler, Setophaga nigrescens
Townsend's warbler, Setophaga townsendi
Hermit warbler, Setophaga occidentalis
Golden-cheeked warbler, Setophaga chrysoparia
Black-throated green warbler, Setophaga virens


== References ==