Title: Teabagging
Aspects: {'T bag'}

Teabagging is a slang term for the sexual act of a man placing his scrotum in the mouth of his sexual partner for pleasure, or onto the face or head of another person, sometimes as a comedic device.
The name of the practice, when it is done in a repeated in-and-out motion, is derived from its passing resemblance to the dipping of a tea bag into a cup of hot water as a method of brewing tea. As a form of non-penetrative sex, it can be done for its own enjoyment or as foreplay. The practice may also be performed during sexual assault. 


== Oral sex ==
Along with the penis, the scrotum is sensitive and considered to be an erogenous zone. This makes varying degrees of stimulation an integral part of oral sex for many men. And while some men may enjoy the stimulation, not every man responds to it.  Sex experts have praised various techniques that the performer can use during fellatio to increase their partner's pleasure. These include gently sucking and tugging on the scrotum and use of lips to ensure minimal contact with their teeth. It has also been recommended as a form of foreplay or safer sex. It presents a low risk of transmission for many diseases, including HIV.Its gain in prominence has been attributed to its depiction in the 1989 film Pecker, directed by John Waters. It has since become popular enough with couples to be discussed during an episode of the television series Sex and the City.Sex and relationship experts have varying definitions on how the act is performed. According to columnist Dan Savage, the person whose scrotum is being stimulated is known as "the teabagger" and the one giving the stimulation is "the teabaggee": "A teabagger dips sack; a teabaggee receives dipped sack." Some consider the act to be as simple as fellatio involving the scrotum. Others consider the position to involve the man squatting over his reclined partner, while the testicles are repeatedly raised and lowered into the mouth. Whether or not licking and fondling is considered tea bagging was once debated on The Howard Stern Show.


== Social ridicule and harassment ==
Tea bagging is not always carried out consensually, such as when it is done as a practical joke, which, in some jurisdictions, is legally considered sexual assault or sexual battery. It has been practiced during hazing or bullying incidents with reports including groups holding down victims, while the perpetrator "shoved his testicles in [the victim's] face" or puts his "crotch to his head".Imitating the act by repeatedly crouching over a fallen enemy has become a popular taunt in multiplayer first person shooter video games and platform games, done to imply domination, humiliation, or as a teasing joke.  Although some players may consider the act to be bad sportsmanship, its use has become widespread in video game culture.


== See also ==
Swaffelen
Turkey slap


== References ==