Title: Titanosaurus
Aspects: {'T. indicus'}

Titanosaurus (meaning 'titanic lizard' – named after the mythological Titans, deities of Ancient Greece) is a dubious genus of sauropod dinosaurs, first described by Lydekker in 1877.  It is known from the Maastrichtian (Upper Cretaceous) Lameta Formation of India.


== Discovery and naming ==
Titanosaurus was the first Indian dinosaur to be discovered. The holotype vertebrae was discovered in 1828, but it was not officially named until 1877.


== Taxonomy ==
Titanosaurus is estimated to have grown up to 9–12 metres (30–40 ft) long and up to approximately 13 tons in weight. Wilson and Upchurch (2003) treated Titanosaurus as a nomen dubium ("dubious name") because they noted that the original Titanosaurus specimens cannot be distinguished from those of related animals.


== Species ==
 
As the type genus of Titanosauria, Titanosaurus at times became a wastebasket taxon for a number of titanosaurs, including those not just from India but also southern Europe, Laos, and South America. Only two among these, however, are currently considered species of Titanosaurus: T. indicus and T. blandfordi, both of which are considered nomina dubia.
Other species formerly referred to this genus include: 

"Titanosaurus" rahioliensis - Described based on teeth, this species is now considered an indeterminate neosauropod.
"Titanosaurus" colberti - This species was the most well-known species of Titanosaurus, but has been moved into its own genus, Isisaurus.
"Titanosaurus" australis - Known from relatively complete remains, but has been renamed Neuquensaurus.
"Titanosaurus" nanus - A small species found to be non diagnostic, and hence a nomen dubium.
"Titanosaurus" robustus - Now referred to Neuquensaurus.
"Titanosaurus" madagascariensis - nomen dubium; UCB 92305 apparently related to Vahiny, while UCM 92829 has been reassigned to Rapetosaurus.
"Titanosaurus" falloti - This large species, native to Laos, has disputed affinities. It has been considered synonymous with Tangvayosaurus and Huabeisaurus, but the remains are too fragmentary to be sure.
"Titanosaurus" valdensis - Referred to a new genus, Iuticosaurus, but still considered a nomen dubium.
"Titanosaurus" lydekkeri - Also referred to Iuticosaurus, but its relation to I. valdensis is uncertain.
"Titanosaurus" dacus - A dwarf titanosaur; now moved to the genus Magyarosaurus.


== References ==