Title: University of Canberra
Aspects: {'U of C'}

The University of Canberra (UC) is a public university in Bruce, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory. The campus is within walking distance of Westfield Belconnen, and 8.7 km distance to Canberra's Civic Centre. UC offers undergraduate and postgraduate courses covering five faculties: Health, Art and Design, Business, Government and Law, Education and Science and Technology.
UC partners with two local ACT schools: UC Senior Secondary College Lake Ginninderra and University of Canberra High School Kaleen. The University of Canberra College provides pathways into university for domestic and international students.


== History ==
The University of Canberra was first established in 1967 as the Canberra College of Advanced Education. The Canberra CAE became the University of Canberra under sponsorship of Monash University in 1990. 

 Over 70,000 students have graduated from the university since 1970.The University of Canberra has grown by seventy-eight percent since 2007, going from 7,300 students to over 13,000 in 2014. The median Australian Tertiary Admission Rank of UC students is approximately 71.


=== Foundation stone and Stone Day ===

At the end of the year after classes finish but before exams, Stone Day was once held, a music festival with local bands, which lasted several days. The day before it was known as Stone Eve. It started as a celebration held annually to mark the placing of the foundation stone by Prime Minister John Gorton on 28 October 1968. As of 2012, Stone Day has not been held as an official University event.
The stone is displayed near Building 1 at the University, and an inscription on it reads:

This Stone was unveiled by the right honourable J.G. Gorton, M.P., Prime Minister of Australia, on 28 October 1968, to mark the establishment of the Canberra College of Advanced Education.

Over the years the Stone Day program gradually became larger and larger, taking up a whole week and 'Stonefest' was one of Australia's most popular music festivals. The first foundation celebrations were held in 1971. In 1973 Stone Day celebrations were held over two days, which was expanded to take up a whole week in 1976. In the 1980s and 1990s, Stoneweek became a popular Canberra entertainment event, which in 2000 became Stonefest. The Stonefest event was not held for a number of years at the University of Canberra. In 2014, the University decided to create a 'Stonefest' mini music festival where there was a DJ and numerous activities. It wasn't an extremely popular event and has not been held since. In June 2019 the University of Canberra announced that Stonefest would be returning in October of that year in an expanded format with both local and international acts performing.


=== Partnership with TAFE Campuses ===
An announcement was made on 17 September 2012 that the university would establish a branch campus in Melbourne from 2013, by partnering with Holmesglen Institute of TAFE. The branch campus, to be situated at Holmesglen's Chadstone location, would be called University of Canberra Melbourne (UCM). On 17 October 2012, the University of Canberra was announced to have partnered with Holmesglen Institute of TAFE in Victoria, to establish this branch campus in Chadstone, Melbourne.The article also state plans by taking the UC Brand in Queensland through an agreement with Metropolitan South Institute of TAFE in Brisbane. The intention was to create a new higher education model known as a "Polytechnic University". This model was adopted by the UK Government until 1992.
This model was to combine both worlds of TAFE's strong connections to industry, and universities' strong connection to scholarly work and research.However, on 24 January 2013, UC expansion plans in Melbourne were blocked by the former Education Minister, Chris Evans. The University had not been granted approval by the federal government for expansion beyond its original campus. This event has already been experienced by UC, as the federal Government rejected another deal from UC to merge with the local Canberra TAFE, the Canberra Institute of Technology, or CIT.Despite this setback, it eventually came to a halt on 3 June 2013. Newly appointed education minister, Craig Emerson, overturned the decision by allowing UC degrees to be taught at four different TAFEs from 2014, therefore reversing an earlier decision to block such arrangements. From 2014, UC degrees were taught at these TAFE Campuses:
Holmesglen Institute of TAFE in Victoria
Metropolitan South Institute of TAFE in Brisbane, Queensland
Northern Sydney Institute of TAFE in New South Wales
South Western Sydney Institute of TAFE in New South WalesThe goal is to expand the UC brand outside the Canberra Region. "(The university) needs to expand and diversify in order to get scale and sustainability" according to UC vice-chancellor, Stephen Parker. The arrangement allows for some 6500 UC students across the four TAFEs by 2018. Parker said he expected just one or two degrees to be offered initially but it was too early to say what they would be. The degrees would be jointly developed by UC and the TAFEs but the students would enrol as UC students receiving UC qualifications. This deal also formed a new group called the Australian Polytechnic Network between UC and the four TAFEs.


== Campus ==


=== Bruce ===
The University has one campus, located in the suburb of Bruce, which covers 290 acres of buildings, roads and access routes. Being a small University with a small campus, there are just over 28 buildings, each dedicated to a particular discipline of learning or faculty. Most of these buildings are arranged around the main concourse. Each building is numbered and many do not hold any title or namesake. New students are always advised during orientation week that the buildings are not numbered in a particular order however, the buildings around the concourse are progressively numbered in a counter-clockwise direction from building 1. It is a common myth that the numbers relate to when each building was constructed, however, a master plan was designed to have these building around the concourse numbered this way.


=== Library ===

The University of Canberra Library is located in Building 8. The Library 'aims to provide a range of high quality scholarly information resources and services to the University community. The building has four floors. '


=== Facilities ===
The Refectory is the main food hall located in Building 1, operated by the UC Union. It provides a laid-back area to study or socialise, with cafes, post office, general shop, pool tables, and lounges, and is also concert venue. Upstairs there are study rooms which can be booked by students and staff.
The Hub is located under the main concourse, providing cafes, a hairdressing salon, and a branch of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia. The University of Canberra's student radio station 87.8 UCFM studios are also located in The Hub. The UC HUB also hosts DJ's that have seen the likes such as D-Jindy, ARMADYLO, Whole Different as well as No Result. These DJ's have brought major crowds to the University resulting in some of the best parties the University has seen.
A sport and fitness centre is located in Building 29 with gym facilities and is home to Brumbies Rugby administration. There are basketball and squash courts nearby in Building 4, and various sporting ovals available.


=== Student accommodation ===
There are three accommodation options for students - UniLodge (consisting of Cooper Lodge, Weeden Lodge and more recently UC Lodge, all run by UniLodge Australia Pty Ltd), University of Canberra Village (run by Campus Living Villages) and University Gardens (located in neighbor suburb of Belconnen, run by UniGardens Pty). All options are provided to all students, including international students.


== Organisation and administration ==


=== Administration ===
The current Chancellor of the University since 1 January 2014 is Tom Calma, , an Australian Aboriginal elder of the Kungarakan people, and a human rights and social justice campaigner.The current Vice-Chancellor of the University since 1 September 2016 is Deep Saini, a plant physiologist. The former Vice-Chancellor of the University from 1 March 2007 to 1 July 2016 was Stephen Parker, , a legal academic.Like most Australian universities, University of Canberra derives the majority of its revenue from Australian Government funding and student fees. The ACT Government provides around one percent of the university's operating budget.


=== Faculties ===
The five faculties are:

Arts & DesignArts and design primarily provides students with the skills to be successful in a wide range of careers in the contemporary arts and communication. Arts and design specialises in Architecture, Landscape Architecture, Graphic Design, Communication Studies, Journalism, Creative Writing and Poetry, International Studies, and Media Arts. The faculty has two schools: School of Design and the Built Environment and School of Arts and Communication.

Business, Government and LawThe Business Government and Law Faculty provides students with a choice and flexibility together with real world experience. Students have the option to major in over 70 areas from across the University. Students can venture into Accounting, Applied Economics, Business Administration, Business Informatics, Construction, Finance, Law, Management, Marketing, Politics, Sociology, Public Policy, Tourism, and Urban and Regional Planning.

EducationThe Education faculty offers courses designed to cover all stages of teacher development with courses in early childhood, primary and secondary.

HealthThe Faculty of Health prepares allied health professionals, including nurses, midwives, occupational therapists, optometrists & vision scientists, psychologists, physiotherapists, pharmacists, dietitians, nutritionists, radiologists, speech pathologists, exercise scientists, and sports management professionals.

Science and TechnologyThe Faculty of Science and Technology trains students in Environmental Sciences, Biomedical and Forensic as well as Information Technology, Information Systems, Engineering, and Mathematics.
UC also offers a range of double degrees that combine two degrees from different faculties.


== Academic profile ==


=== Rankings ===
The university is named among the world's top 40 young universities in the 2019 Times Higher Education (THE) Young University Rankings. 
The university has risen to number 34 in THE's list of the best universities under 50 years of age worldwide.


=== Research centres ===
The university has a number of research centres relating to its areas of research strength. These are:


== Notable people ==


=== Staff ===
Notable staff members include/have included:

John Dryzek, political scientist
Patricia Easteal, Professor of Law
Donald Horne, journalist, writer, social critic, historian and public intellectual
Peter Leahy, former Chief of Army (Australia)
Ingrid Moses, Emeritus Professor and a former Chancellor
Susan Ryan, one-time Labor government Minister


=== Alumni ===


== See also ==

List of universities in Australia
University of Canberra (Wikiversity)
University of Canberra Vikings


== References ==


== Bibliography ==


== External links ==
Official website