Title: Utrecht University
Aspects: {'U of U'}

Utrecht University (UU; Dutch: Universiteit Utrecht, formerly Rijksuniversiteit Utrecht) is a university in Utrecht, the Netherlands. Established 26 March 1636, it is one of the oldest universities in the Netherlands. In 2016, it had an enrolment of 29,425 students, and employed 5,568 faculty and staff. In 2011, 485 PhD degrees were awarded and 7,773 scientific articles were published. The 2013 budget of the university was €765 million.Utrecht University has been placed in the top 100 universities in the world by four major ranking tables. The university is rated as the best university in the Netherlands by the Shanghai Ranking of World Universities 2013, and ranked as the 13th best university in Europe and the 52nd best university of the world.
The university's motto is "Sol Iustitiae Illustra Nos," which means "Sun of Justice, shine upon us." This motto was gleaned from a literal Latin Bible translation of Malachi 4:2. (Rutgers University, having a historical connection with Utrecht University, uses a modified version of this motto.) Utrecht University is led by the University Board, consisting of prof. dr. Henk Kummeling (Rector Magnificus) and Hans Amman.


== History ==
This section incorporates text translated from the Dutch Wikipedia articleUtrecht University was founded on 26 March 1636. The influential professor of theology Gisbertus Voetius delivered the inaugural speech, and Bernardus Schotanus (professor of law and mathematics) became the university's first rector magnificus. Anna Maria van Schurman, who became the university's first female student, was invited to write a Latin poem for the inauguration. Initially, only a few dozen students attended classes at the university. Seven professors worked in four faculties: philosophy, which offered all students an introductory education, and three higher-level faculties (theology, medicine and law).
Utrecht University flourished in the seventeenth century, despite competition with the older universities of Leiden (1575), Franeker (1585) and Groningen (1614) and the schools of Harderwijk (1599; a university from 1648) and Amsterdam (1632). Leiden, in particular, proved a strong competitor and made further improvement necessary. A botanical garden was built on the grounds of the present Sonnenborgh Observatory, and three years later the Smeetoren added an astronomical observatory. The university attracted many students from abroad (especially from Germany, England and Scotland). They witnessed the intellectual and theological battle the proponents of the new philosophy (René Descartes lived for a few years in Utrecht) fought with the proponents of the strict Reformed theologian Voetius.
In 1806 the French occupying authorities of the Netherlands downgraded Utrecht University to an école secondaire (high school), but after the establishment of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1813 it regained its former status. Leiden, Louvain, Groningen, Utrecht and Ghent were the five universities (Dutch: hoge scholen) of the new state, and Leiden received the title of eerste hoge school ("first university"). Two of the universities (Louvain and Ghent) became part of the new Belgian state after it separated from the northern Netherlands in 1830. This left Utrecht one of only three Dutch universities.
Utrecht played a prominent role in the golden age of Dutch science. Around 1850 the "Utrechtian School" of science formed, with Pieter Harting, Gerardus J. Mulder, Christophorus H. D. Buys Ballot and Franciscus Donders among the leading scientists. They introduced the educational laboratory (onderwijslaboratorium) as a practical learning place for their students. The University is represented in the Stichting Academisch Erfgoed, a foundation with the goal of preserving university collections.
Utrecht University recently joined Washington University in St. Louis’s McDonnell International Scholars Academy.


== Description ==

The university consists of seven faculties:
Faculty of Humanities
Department of History and Art History
Department of Languages, Literature and Communication
Department of Media and Culture Studies
Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies
Faculty of Social and Behavioural Sciences
Department of Education and Pedagogy
Department of Social Sciences
Department of Psychology
Faculty of Law, Economics and GovernanceUtrecht University School of Economics (USE)
Utrecht University School of Law
Utrecht University School of Governance (USG)
Faculty of Geosciences
Department of Earth Sciences
Department of Physical Geography
Department of Innovation, Environmental and Energy Sciences (Copernicus Institute)
Department of Human Geography and Spatial Planning
Faculty of Medicine
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Faculty of Science
Department of Biology
Department of Chemistry
Department of Information and Computing Sciences
Department of Mathematics
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Department of Physics and AstronomyThere are three interfaculty units:

University College Utrecht
University College Roosevelt
COLUU Centre for Education and LearningThe two large faculties of Humanities and Law & Governance are situated in the inner city of Utrecht. The other five faculties and most of the administrative services are located in Utrecht Science Park De Uithof, a campus area on the outskirts of the city. University College Utrecht, along with the Utrecht School of Economics, are situated in the former Kromhout Kazerne, which used to be a Dutch military base. University College Roosevelt is located off-campus in the city of Middelburg in the south-west of the Netherlands.

		
		
		
		


== Notable alumni and faculty ==

Utrecht University counts a number of distinguished scholars among its alumni and faculty, including 12 Nobel Prize laureates and 13 Spinoza Prize laureates.


== International rankings ==
On the 2015 Academic Ranking of World Universities list, the University of Utrecht was ranked 56th in the world and the highest in the Netherlands. Its ranking has declined slightly since 2003, when it was ranked 40th.
In the 2015/2016 QS World University Rankings, Utrecht was ranked 94th, having improved its ranking since 2004 when it was ranked 120th.
In The Times Higher Education 2014–15 World University Rankings, the university is ranked 79th.


== See also ==
List of early modern universities in Europe
Roosevelt Academy International Honors College of Utrecht University located in Middelburg, Zeeland
University College Utrecht International Honors College of Utrecht University located in Utrecht
Utrecht Network
Utrecht School of the Arts
Utrecht Summer School
Utrecht University of Applied Sciences (HU – Hogeschool Utrecht)
Utrecht School of Law Clinical Programme on Conflict, Human Rights and International Justice
Codex Boreelianus
Open Access Scholarly Publishers Association, of which Utrecht University Library is a founding member
Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, a research institute of Utrecht University in the field of molecular Life Sciences


== References ==


== External links ==
Utrecht University homepage
Catalogus Professorum Academiae Rheno-Traiectinae – Catalogue listing all professors who have held chairs at Utrecht University
Utrecht University datasets