Title: University of Zaragoza
Aspects: {'U of Z'}

The University of Zaragoza, sometimes referred to as Saragossa University (in Spanish: Universidad de Zaragoza) is a university located in Zaragoza, in the Aragon region of Spain. Founded in 1542, it is one of the oldest universities in Spain, with a history dating back to the Roman period. The university has over 40,000 students in its 22 faculties. The university is the only public university in the region. Its activity is spread along the three provinces of Aragon, with teaching campuses and research centres in Huesca, Teruel and Zaragoza.


== History ==


=== Beginnings ===

Ecclesiastical Schools were the initial elements of the University of Zaragoza. These schools were later consolidated into the School of Zaragoza, led by Bishop Braulio during the 7th century (who would later be made the patron saint of the University).  The School of Arts officially becoming a university in 1542, though some scholars argue it could be considered a University of Arts already from 1477.


=== Foundation ===
The Studium Generale of Arts, also called Studio Mayor or primitive University of Zaragoza,  was in the  Magdalena and St. Nicholas neighborhoods.  Its main building was  a  broad tower of circular base  on the old wall of the city, and it had more than 20 chambers distributed in three different floors. Besides the normal chambers that were granted and rented by the University to both pupils and  teachers, on the first floor the tower had the chamber called "General Mayor,"  where the grades were provided,  and  also a library. On the second floor there was the prison, the  latrines and the doorkeeper's chamber. Finally, in the last floor there were  bigger rooms with balconies, and the chamber of the four Masters of Arts. The Studium had also bought more chambers  in the tower surroundings  and on the city wall, and the most important ones were the  five chambers called "El Cocinador," and  eleven more in the Studium's square, called  "El Corralet" chambers.The Studium's head was  the Chancellor, a position always held by the archbishop of Zaragoza, and the second in command was the Vicechancellor, who was also the High Master of the Studium. The High Master collected taxes from any pupil, with the exception of the poor, the cleric from La Seo cathedral, or  any student he would want to forgive such payment. Under him  there were the four Masters of Arts, four positions reserved for  selected individuals  that held  a master of arts degree, and who  were in charge of  the teaching of the liberal arts. Under them there were the "Bachilleres," who were mostly teaching  advanced 
Latin grammar, and  the "Camareros," who were providing more basic  Latin lessons. The lowest rank teachers were  the "Cubicularios,"  also called  "repetidores" in other Studiums, who  merely repeated the lessons from the other teachers. The Studium also had a  Rector, who was an apostolic position that represented the Archbishop's power in this primitive university, and had the power of approving all the academic positions  in the Studium, and administrated the  fees from the students for reparations and  other needs of this university.The primitive University of Zaragoza had  a Faculty of Aristotelian Logic and another of Philosophy (it included both Natural Philosophy and Aristotelian Ethics), and all together they formed the Faculty of Arts. But this Studium Generale had also a Faculty of Grammar,  which  had several hundreds of  students during the first decades of the XVI century, while the Faculty of Arts had near 50. In order to  get their grades, the students had to be endorsed  by another older student or teacher  and to  pass private exams, and pay fees. Lessons were taught  in the morning and afternoons,   which made that  many of them would  rent chambers for   staying at night.This primitive University of Zaragoza had physician master Pedro La Cabra as its first High Master, and after him  the  maestre Luis Gorriz, who  died in  1510. After him, the archbishop appointed his personal physician, master Juan Tarabal, who remained in this position until 1520, when the archbishop died because of the plague. That year  Tarabal  was substituted by master Gaspar Lax,  a prolific  author and prominent European figure in logic, philosophy and mathematics, whose works were used in many other contemporaneous universities. Lax  had been  teaching in  the University of Paris and later in the University of Huesca, and from 1520 he was simultaneously  High Master and one of the four Masters of Arts. This High Master  had erasmian friends, both in Paris and  Zaragoza, and allowed Erasmus’s works to be  taught in this Studium. That same year of 1520 Michael Servetus,  brilliant nephew of Gaspar Lax,  started his studies  under the  direction of his uncle and  the other three Masters of Arts (Exerich, Ansías,  Miranda, Carnicer, Villalpando).  Servetus  became himself a Master of Arts in 1525, a position he held until 1527, when he had a  brawl with his uncle Gaspar Lax, and after being  expelled from the Studium he left Spain  for Toulouse Studium Generale. Lax kept being the High Master until his death in 1560.


=== University of Zaragoza Recent History ===

The University of Zaragoza is the main centre of technological innovation in the Ebro Valley and enjoys a great prestige among the group of Spanish, European and International universities it has relations with.Academic staff at the University of Zaragoza are highly specialised and have a broad research and teaching experience. Be it Spanish as a Foreign Language or fields as interesting to international students as Spanish Literature, Geography, Archaeology, Cinema, History, Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems (BIFI Research Group) or Nanotechnologies (among many others), the combination of teaching and research is proving very successful.The University, with a total of about 40.000 students, is composed by a teaching staff of about 3.000 with different positions and an administrative and technical staff of about 2.000. It is distributed in campuses located in Zaragoza, Huesca and Teruel.


== Campus ==

The University of Zaragoza campuses are located in the autonomous Community of Aragon in Spain. The community is made up of three provinces: Zaragoza, Huesca, and Teruel. The original campus resides in Zaragoza, the capital of Aragon, but additional campuses were created in both Huesca and Teruel in 1985.


=== Zaragoza ===
The Zaragoza campus is divided into five different locations throughout the city. Campus Plaza San Francisco is the largest of the five locations and is home to a majority of the university colleges and departments in Zaragoza. The other four locations, Campus Rio Ebro, Escuela Universitaria de Turismo, Plaza de Basilio and Facultad de Veterinaria host only one to two colleges each.The Paraninfo building, located on the San Francisco campus, is one of the most valuable and significant buildings owned by the entire university. Originally inaugurated in 1893, the building was scheduled for restoration in 2006. The project inauguration was attended by the King of Spain, the president of the Government of Aragon and other important figures. The restoration architects, Luis Franco and Mariano Pemán, made great efforts to maintain the architectural heritage of the building while adding new functionality. At the front of the building sits four large stone statues of notable scientists and doctors that had connections to the university. On display are Andrés Piquer, Miguel Servet, Ignacio Jordán de Asso and Fausto Elhuyar. Today, the Paraninfo is, as the name suggests, a functional auditorium as well as the University of Zaragoza Library(Main Library).


=== Huesca ===
Huesca is located roughly 75 kilometers northeast of Zaragoza. The Huesca location has a number of colleges including the Polytechnic School, Faculty of Health and Sport Science, Faculty of Humanities and Education, and Faculty of Business and Public Management. Also, the affiliated School of Nursing of San Jorge hospital is located in Huesca.


=== Teruel ===
Teruel is located roughly 170 kilometers south of Zaragoza. The Teruel campus is home to the technical college where you will find computer engineering and similar programs. It is also the location of the Faculty of Social and Human Sciences and the affiliated School of Nursing of the Obispo Polanco hospital.


== Academics ==
At the University of Zaragoza, the old traditional studies are offered at “Faculties” (Facultades), e.g. “Facultad de Derecho” (Faculty of Law), while new more technical studies are offered at “Schools” (Escuelas) e.g. “Escuela Universitaria de Ingeniería Técnica” (University School for Technical Engineering) or “Polytechnics” (Politécnicos), e.g. “Centro Politécnico Superior” (Higher Polytechnic Centre).


=== Courses in Spanish as a Foreign Language ===
Courses in Spanish as a Foreign Language are run throughout the year and vary between 90 and 570 hours. The University offers all levels and some specialised courses. Courses along the academic term are offered in Zaragoza, while the Summer Courses are offered in Jaca – The Pyrenees.  The University of Zaragoza was the first Spanish university to offer Spanish Courses for international students in 1927.


=== Research Centers ===
The University of Zaragoza covers a wide spectrum of knowledge organized within the areas of Engineering and Technology, Experimental Sciences, Health Sciences, Social and Juridical Sciences and Humanities. In 2010, the University of Zaragoza had 6 research institutes, 1 affiliated research institute, 5 joint research institutes and 3 research centers. At this time, the annual figure allocated by the University of Zaragoza to research and development was €60 million. By 2011, the university had an estimated 3,803 researchers and 8,305 partnering companies.


==== Immunotherapy Cancer Research in Aragon ====
The University of Zaragoza is one of the world leaders in immunotherapy cancer research. A large amount of this research is led by the individual teams of Julián Pardo, Luis Martinez and Alberto Anel. Their research has led to significant contributions in the understanding of cancer cell immunity and they have numerous patents intended for cancer treatments.


=== MIT–Zaragoza International Logistics Program ===
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology-University of Zaragoza International Logistics Program was created in 2003 by the MIT's Center for Transportation and Logistics (CTL), the PLAZA logistics park, the government of Aragón, the University of Zaragoza and by industry partners from the private and non-profit sectors. The cooperation offers a unique educational and research opportunity that consolidates the interests of industry, government and academia by building and learning from the largest logistics park in Europe.The education program offers a master's degree which builds upon the curriculum of MIT's Master of Engineering in Supply Chain Management (SCM). The program is taught in English and attracts an international audience, with 11 countries of origin represented in the class of 20 students for the 2014 academic year. The program has been named by El Mundo, the #1 Logistics and Supply Chain Management degree in Spain for the last 4 years from 2011-2015. In addition, the collaboration offers a doctorate degree and executive education courses leading to certificates in various logistics-related disciplines. The research program uses the logistics park as a working laboratory to experiment with new logistics processes, concepts and technologies, in active collaboration with leading academic institutions and companies from around the world.


=== Rankings ===
El Mundo Rankings of Spanish Master Programs 
(2014/2015)
#1 Logistics and Supply Chain Management
#2 Environmental Energy
(2013/2014)
#1 Education
#1 Logistics and Supply Chain Management
#2 Environmental Energy
Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) 
(2013)  
#9-10 Top Universities in Spain
CWTS Leiden Ranking (Spain)
Impact - Measured by citations
Collaboration - Measured by co-authorships
(2014) 
#3 Social Sciences (Impact)
#3 Medial Sciences (Collaboration)
#3 Cognitive sciences (Collaboration)
#14 All sciences (Impact)
#14 All Sciences (Collaboration)


== Notable alumni and former students ==
Science/Math/Academics

Santiago Ramón y Cajal, awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1906 and is widely recognized as the father of modern neuroscience. A mention of his famous brain cell drawings was made in episode 16 of season 6, “The Tangible Affection Proof”, of The Big Bang Theory television show.
Gaspar Lax, Spanish philosopher and mathematician
Fidel Pagés, developer of the epidural anesthesia technique, he received his degree in Medicine and Surgery with honors in 1908
Jerónimo Blancas, historian and scholar, published the treatise Aragonensium rerum commentariiBusiness

César Alierta, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of Telefónica S.A.Artists/Writers

Antonio Mingote, Spanish cartoonist and writer
Dino Valls, Spanish Painter
José Antonio Labordeta, singer/songwriter of “Aragón” and “Canto a la Libertad”, and the founder of the Andalán newspaper
José Martí, national Cuban hero, writer and recognized as one of the great Latin American intellects of the 1800s
Juan Loreno Palmireno, Spanish poet, author and playwright
Lupercio and Bartolomé de Argensola, brothers and Spanish poets
Maria Moliner, author of Diccionario de uso del español
Fernando Lázaro Carreter, President (1992–98) of the Royal Spanish Academy (Real Academia Española), the official royal institution responsible for overseeing the Spanish language.
Fernando Aramburu, poet, narrator and essayist, awarded Premio de la Crítica to the best narrative in Spanish in 2017.  He earned his degree in Hispanic Philology from the University of Zaragoza in 1982.Politics/Law

Jordan de Asso, jurist, historian and naturalist
Manuel Azaña, 2nd President of the Second Spanish Republic, served as 55th and 63rd Prime Minister of Spain
Manuel de Roda, Ambassador in Rome under King Fernando VI and Ministry of "Grace and Justice" under King Carlos III of Spain
Xabier Arzalluz, Spanish Basque nationalist politicianReligion

Pedro Apaolaza, archbishop of Zaragoza (1635 – 1643)Celebrity

Adriana Abenia, model, actress and TV Personality


== Notable emeritus faculty ==
Pedro Simón Abril, Known for his translations of work by famous philosophers such as Aristotle, Plato and others; also a primary figure in the Spanish humanism movement of the 16th century (1530 - 1595)
Matías Barrio y Mier, historian of law, chair of Geografia Historica 1874, Carlist political leader (1844 – 1909)
Salvador Minguijón Adrián, historian of law, chair of Historia General del Derecho Español 1911-1933, 1936-1938 (1874 - 1959)


== Bibliography ==
González Ancín, Miguel & Towns, Otis. (2017) Miguel Servet en España (1506-1527). Edición ampliada ISBN 978-84-697-8054-1.


== See also ==
List of medieval universities


== Notes and references ==


== External links ==
Official Website in English
 Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "University of Saragossa" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.