Title: Louisiana State University Laboratory School
Aspects: {'U-High'}

Louisiana State University Laboratory School (U-High) is a laboratory school under Louisiana State University and is one of two laboratory schools in Baton Rouge. The other is Southern Laboratory School (commonly known as "Southern Lab"), which is operated by Southern University on the north side of the city.
The school was established by the College of Education, now known as the College of Human Sciences and Education, of Louisiana State University and has operated under its auspices for nearly 100 years. This coeducational school exists as an independent system to provide training opportunities for pre- and in-service teachers and to serve as a demonstration and educational research center. Since the school is part of the LSU system, students are required to pay tuition. The school is located on the main campus of Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, a center for the petrochemical industry and a major deep-water port. Baton Rouge is the capital of Louisiana with a population of over 600,000.


== Notable alumni ==
Elizabeth Ashley, actress
Bradford Banta, former NFL professional football player and standout at USC
Glen Davis, current professional basketball player for the Los Angeles Clippers of the NBA and standout at LSU
Jimmy Field, Baton Rouge lawyer and member of the Louisiana Public Service Commission from 1996 to 2012
Brian Kinchen, former NFL professional football player and standout at LSU
Richard Baker (Class of 1966), former member of the Louisiana House from East Baton Rouge parish from 1979–1987 (as a Democrat) and U.S. House of Representatives from Louisiana's 6th Congressional District from 1987–2008 (as a Republican)
Chuck McMains (Class of 1966), former member of the Louisiana House from East Baton Rouge parish; Baton Rouge lawyer and lobbyist
Johnny Robinson, former NFL professional football player and standout at LSU
Steven Soderbergh, Hollywood director of several films including Ocean's Eleven
Darryl Hamilton, former Major League Baseball player
Doug Moreau, former district attorney of East Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana and former LSU football player
Chad Loup, former LSU football player and current physician in orthopedic surgery
Brothers Collis Temple III and Garrett Temple, both former LSU basketball players and Garrett now plays professionally with the Memphis Grizzlies. Both are sons of Collis Temple Jr., LSU's first African-American varsity athlete
Oliver Brown, former LSU basketball player
Benjy Davis, lead singer of the Benjy Davis Project, a southern rock band that tours throughout the south and up the east coast
Hall Davis V, former University of Louisiana at Lafayette defensive end, selected 149th overall in the 5th round by the St. Louis Rams in the 2010 NFL Draft.
Rheagan Courville, former elite gymnast and LSU Lady Tigers gymnastics team member.
Tim Williams, Linebacker, Baltimore Ravens, Former Alabama Standout
Patrick Reed, professional golfer and 2018 Masters Champion


== References ==


== External links ==
UHS homepage
LSU homepage