Title: United States Post Office and Courthouse (Camden, New Jersey)
Aspects: {'U.S. Post Office and Courthouse'}

The United States Post Office and Courthouse (1932) and the Mitchell H. Cohen United States Courthouse (1994) house the United States District Court for the District of New Jersey in Camden, New Jersey. The back-to-back buildings are joined by a second story enclosed skyway.


== United States Post Office and Courthouse ==
Located at 401 Market Street between Camden Central Business District and Cooper Grant the United States Post Office and Courthouse opened in 1932. The neoclassical Art deco building was designed by the Office of the Supervising Architect under James A. Wetmore with an exterior primarily in limestone, granite, brick. Prominent interior features include decorative and colorful terracotta detailing; Spanish Colonial ornamentation and a ceremonial courtroom with oak wainscot paneling. In 1999, an addition connecting two wings of the building was created on the 2nd floor of the building. The arriccio, sinopia drawings of the fresco for Ben Shahn's Jersey Homesteads Mural was removed from its original community center location in what has now become Roosevelt and is permanently installed in the custom-designed gallery within it. the building houses the United States Bankruptcy Court District of New Jersey. The building is listed in the state and federal registers of historic places.


== Mitchell H. Cohen United States Courthouse (annex) ==

The Mitchell H. Cohen United States Courthouse was designated in 1992 honor of federal Judge Mitchell H. Cohen. Completed in 1994 the courthouse's entrance is located on Cooper Street. The seven story, 180,000 SF building includes 12 courtrooms and attendant facilities, Appellate Judge's suites, Grand Jury room, District Clerk's office, US Marshall's Service Administrative office, prisoner holding facility, law library, and secure indoor parking.


== See also ==
Camden County Hall of Justice
List of United States federal courthouses in New Jersey
National Register of Historic Places listings in Camden County, New Jersey
List of tallest buildings in Camden


== References ==


== External links ==
United States District Court for the District of New Jersey
Library of Congress gallery