Title: Union of Agricultural Work Committees
Aspects: {'UAWC (disambiguation)'}

The Union of Agricultural Work Committees (UAWC) is a non-profit organization that was established in 1986 to improve the performance and professionalism of Palestinian farmers during the Israel-Palestinian conflict. The Union also aims to help Palestinian farmers market their produce and provides agricultural employment opportunities through a framework of cooperation with domestic, Arab, and international agricultural development institutions.The UAWC was established in Jerusalem; and founded by a group of volunteer agronomists and development workers "loosely affiliated with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP)", it is one of the oldest non-governmental Palestinian organizations. In the year 1993, UAWC developed its organizational structure, consisting of a general assembly, board of trustees, general director, and two executive directors; in the West Bank and in Gaza Strip.UAWC initially focused on forming Agricultural Cooperatives and Committees in the different Palestinian rural areas of the West Bank and Gaza.UAWC supports the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement against Israel.


== Funding ==
UAWC receives funding from numerous western governments and aid organisations including the European Commission, World Vision Australia, AusAID, and FAO. UAWC is in partnership with many international and local organizations like Action Against Hunger, Oxfam, NARC and LRC.
In February 2012, World Vision Australia (WV) and AusAid were accused of having provided "financial aid to a Gaza-based terrorist group," the (UAWC), which Shurat HaDin (The Israel Law Center) alleged is a "front for terror group the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine." WV "suspended its dealings" with UAWC until the outcome of an investigation of the matter.WV resumed working with UAWC after AusAID and World Vision found the allegations were unfounded. According to The Australian newspaper, 'AusAID has written to Shurat HaDin to confirm that a detailed investigation has been conducted into the claims and no evidence has been found to substantiate them'. However, the Jerusalem Post says that they conducted an independent investigation which "revealed that the PLFP’s Arabic language website includes detailed reports on the UAWC’s work."


== Affiliate of PFLP ==
In his 1997 book Building a Palestinian State: The Incomplete Revolution, Professor Glenn E. Robinson writes in that agronomists that established  the UAWC were loosely affiliated with the PFLP.Researcher Caroline Abu-Sada also mentions that UAWC is affiliated to the PFLP in her book about another Palestinian agricultural organization (PARC) . According to Shurat HaDin of Israel Law Center, both unions, (UAWC) and the Union of Health Workers Committees (UHWC) are closely affiliated with the Palestinian Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), an Arab nationalist organization responsible for numerous acts of terrorism dating back to the 1960s and a group that has long been regarded as a terrorist organization by the governments of the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, European Union, and Israel. Shurat Hadin confirms that both groups receive money from Oxfam.Oxfam Wereldwinkels Belgium has close ties since 2002 with the PFLP affiliate and met them at several occasions. They promote and sell their products to the Belgian market.


== Awards and honours ==
UAWC won the Food Sovereignty Prize in October 2014 which is awarded by the US Food Sovereignty Alliance, an American NGO established to mobilize and educate US and international activists on the "food crisis".

In November 2014, the UAWC won the Equator Prize for its role in sustainable development and fight against poverty through its Seed Bank project initiative. The award was given by the United Nations Development Agency (UNDP) in New York.


== Bibliography ==


== References ==