Title: Andritz AG
Aspects: {'VA Tech (disambiguation)'}

Andritz AG is an Austrian plant engineering group with headquarters in Graz. The group gets its name from the district of  Andritz in which it is located and is listed on the Vienna Stock Exchange.
Andritz employs more than 30,000 employees at over 250 production and service facilities. In 2017, the company reported a revenue of €5.88 billion, a gross profit of €3.27 billion and a net profit of €297 million.


== Business areas ==
Andritz consists of 5 business areas:

Andritz Hydro
Andritz Pulp and Paper
Andritz Metals
Andritz Separation
Andritz Feed & Biofuel


== Andritz Metals ==
The business area Andritz Metals (former "Rolling Mills and Strip Processing") is the third largest business unit. Andritz Metals designs, develops and erects complete lines for the production and further processing of cold-rolled carbon steel, stainless steel and non-ferrous metal strips, including furnaces, presses and acid regeneration equipment.


== History ==


=== 2000 - ===
In March 2000, the company acquired a 50 percent stake in Finland's Ahlstrom Machinery Group from the A. Ahlstrom Corporation, a manufacturer of chemical pulp plants and other pulp processing machinery. As part of the purchase agreement, Andritz also received the option of purchasing full control of Ahlstrom Machinery in the event of Andritz going public. In the meantime, Ahlstrom Machinery was renamed Andritz-Ahlstrom and placed under Andritz's Pulp and Paper division.
Following the IPO, Andritz made good on completing its acquisition of full control of Andritz-Ahlstrom, buying up the rest of that subsidiary in July 2001. Another large acquisition was the purchase of the hydroelectric power division of VA Technologie AG in 2006, as a consequence of a decision of the EU commission in the acquisition of VA Technologie AG by Siemens AG. Experts estimated the price at €200 million. The VA Tech Hydro unit changed its name to Andritz VA Tech Hydro GmbH and became a subsidiary of Andritz AG. With 3000 employees and sales of €620 million, the unit increased the size of Andritz by one third, becoming the company's second-largest business.In May and June 2008, Andritz acquired hydropower technology and certain assets of GE Energy’s hydropower business (including test laboratories in Canada and Brazil), as well as GE Energy’s majority interest in the joint venture GE Hydro Inepar do Brasil.  Since January 2009, all these acquisitions now operate under "Andritz Hydro" name. Andritz Hydro ranks among the 3 largest hydro companies(with Alstom and Voith-Siemens) with historical references back from 19th century by the acquisition over the years of the following companies and technologies, on which the Andritz Hydro group is the legal successor:

ACM - Vevey, Switzerland
AFI, Canada
Baldwin-Lima-Hamilton, USA
Bell, Switzerland
Bouvier, France
Bouvier-Darling, USA
Charmilles, Switzerland
Dominion Engineering Works, Canada
Dominion Bridge, Canada
Escher Wyss & Cie., Switzerland
Ge Hydro, Canada
Hemi Controls, Canada
I.P.Morris, USA
KMPT Ag, Germany
KMW, Sweden
Nohab, Sweden
Pelton  Waterwheel, USA
Sulzer Hydro, Switzerland
Tampella, Finland
Voest-Alpine Maschinenbau Gmbh, Austria
Voest-Alpine Ag, Austria
Voest-Alpine Mce, Austria
Va Tech Voest Mce, Austria
Va Tech Escher Wyss, Germany
Va Tech Escher Wyss, Italy
Va Tech Escher Wyss, Spain
Va Tech Hydro, Switzerland
Va Tech Bouvier Hydro, France
Va Tech Hydro, Canada
Va Tech Escher Wyss, Mexico
Va Tech Hidro, Brazil
Va Tech Hydro Usa Corporation
Va Tech Hydro, Indonesia
Va Tech Hydro Flovel, India
Va Tech Hydro, China
Waplans, Sweden


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Vienna Stock Exchange: Market Data Andritz AG