Title: W Series (championship)
Aspects: {'W series'}

W Series is an all-female single-seater racing championship. The series' first season is in 2019; it features twenty drivers contesting six races.


== Origins ==
The W Series was publicly launched on 10 October 2018. It was created in response to the lack of female drivers progressing to the highest levels of motorsport, particularly Formula 1.The series has the backing of a number of prominent members of the motorsport community, including former F1 driver David Coulthard and engineer Adrian Newey.
"Many sports in which women and men compete equally also run segregated events purely to increase the numbers of women who participate," said chief executive Catherine Bond Muir in the launch announcement. "Until now, motor racing has been the only sport in which there were no separate series for women. Of all the many thousands of people involved in the technical side of our sport across the globe, only a handful are women. The last woman to start a Formula 1 Grand Prix was Lella Lombardi more than 40 years ago, and there has never been a female Formula 1 Grand Prix race winner, let alone a world champion. Our mission is to change all of that."For the inaugural season all cars are operated by Hitech GP.


== Championship format ==
The series features eighteen female racers from around the globe, plus two reserve drivers. The drivers were selected through a selection process that began with fifty-four participants.The 2019 championship consists of six races, all in Europe.The title of 2019 W Series Champion will be awarded to the competitor with the highest number of points from all qualifying rounds run less any penalty points incurred. If two or more drivers finish the season with the same number of points, the higher place in the series shall be awarded to the driver with the most race wins. If the number of races wins is the same, it will then go on the number of second places finishes, then third place finishes and so on.


== Race weekend format ==
Practice and qualifying
Each round includes two free practice sessions of a maximum of forty-five minutes, and a qualifying session of a maximum of thirty minutes.
Race
Each race shall be for a specific number of laps, based on the number of laps that would normally be completed within thirty minutes, plus one lap.


== Points system ==


== Car specifications ==

The W Series features mechanically identical cars based on the recently launched Tatuus T-318, homologated by the FIA for use in Formula 3 in Formula Regional European Championship, powered by Autotecnica Motori-tuned Alfa Romeo 1.8-litre turbocharged engines, and equipped with a halo cockpit safety device.
Chassis construction: Carbon-fibre monocoque
Engine displacement: 1,750 cc (107 cu in) DOHC inline-4
Aspiration: Single-turbocharged
Fuel delivery: Direct fuel injection
Fuel capacity: 45.5 litres (12 US gallons)
Fuel: Aral Ultimate 102 RON unleaded
Weight: 565 kg (1,246 lb)
Power output: 270 hp (201 kW)
Width: 1,850 mm (73 in)
Wheelbase: 2,900 mm (114 in)
Gearbox: Sadev 6-speed paddle-shift gearbox + 1 reverse
Steering: Power-assisted rack-and-pinion


== Champions ==


== Funding structure ==
The inaugural W Series Championship is free to enter; competitors are not required to bring any sponsorship.The championship offers a total prize fund of $1.5 million, with the series champion receiving a top prize of $500,000, and the remaining $1 million being divided among the rest of the drivers.


== Media coverage ==
W Series race coverage is available on Channel 4 in the UK. The show is presented by long-time F1 journalist and sports presenter Lee McKenzie. Motor racing TV and radio broadcaster and commentator Claire Cottingham is the series' lead race commentator, with ex-F1 driver and current Channel 4 F1 presenter David Coulthard as co-commentator. Sky F1's Ted Kravitz is W Series' pitlane reporter. 
W Series races are live-streamed on Facebook and Twitter in countries without television broadcasts.


== Criticism ==
The W Series has faced criticism since it was publicly announced, with opponents of the series asserting that the category will segregate female racers rather than promote their inclusion in established series.
British IndyCar Series driver Pippa Mann responded to the series’ announcement on Twitter, saying "What a sad day for motorsport. Those with funding to help female racers are choosing to segregate them as opposed to supporting them. I am deeply disappointed to see such a historic step backwards take place in my life time."Mann’s views on segregation were echoed by Charlie Martin who stated "This series is founded on segregation, and while it may create opportunities for some female drivers, it sends a clear message that segregation is acceptable. We don’t discriminate in sport based on race, so it is particularly jarring that we feel it is acceptable to do so based on gender in 2018. As racers, we want to compete against the best drivers – regardless of age, race, sexual orientation or gender – and prove we are the best at what we do."Former Formula E and ex-Sauber F1 Test Driver Simona de Silvestro has suggested that the $1.5 million prize fund would be better invested in a scholarship system to support the development of talent across a wider range of motorsport disciplines. "If there’s really that much money going into the series, there are a few girls that have been pretty competitive in junior series. It seems like everyone is just struggling to get the shot. If you look at a Red Bull affiliation or a Mercedes affiliation, somehow these kids always get into the best teams and then they’re winning. I think, personally, it would have been better to do something like the Red Bull programme and make sure some girls get an opportunity on a really good team." 


== See also ==
2019 W Series
Formula 1
FIA Formula 2 Championship
FIA Formula 3 Championship
Formula Woman


== Notes and references ==


== External links ==
Fédération Internationale de l’Automobile
Tatuus
BRSCC
W Series championship website