Title: Waaris (1988 film)
Aspects: {'Waaris'}

Waaris (English: Heir) is a 1988 Hindi-language Indian feature film directed by Raveendra Peepat, starring Raj Babbar, Smita Patil, Amrita Singh, and Raj Kiran in lead roles. The film was adapted from the Punjabi novel Kaara — Hatthi by Sohan Singh Hans (as credited in the film). Audience will have mainstream story with some Masala quality entertainment. In a Punjabi village realistic Punjabi culture and dialogue is the base of the film. Hindi film actress Rekha dubbed the lines for late actress Smita Patil who died before the film's release.
Note: Amrita Singh was an orphan raised by Smita Patil's mother (Sushma Seth) in this movie and not her real sister.


== Plot ==
Multi-millionaire widower Kishan Singh prepares a will which states that his ancestral property is equally divided among his two sons, Gajjan and Dulla, while the son of Gajjan, Shravan shall inherit the farm land. Enraged at not willing anything to his three sons, Thade, Dara and Chhote, Dulla confronts his father which leads to an argument leading to violence and Kishan is killed in the process. Dulla is then apprehended by the police and is jailed, leaving his sons to be raised by Gajjan. Years later Shravan meets with a poor young woman, Paramjit alias Paro and both fall in love leading to marriage. Eventually, Dulla's sentence gets completed and he joins the family once again; shortly after he schemes with goons to have Shravan killed. With no one to claim their rights on Shravan's land, this leaves the way clear for Dulla and his three sons to take control of this land, but Paro will not permit this to happen and the only way she can prevent this is by giving birth to an heir, so she confronts Gajjan to remarry her younger sister, Shibo but there is a short-coming involved as Shibo is in love with a young man, Bhinder and wants to marry only him. It is an uncommon story for film, very difficult for the audience to accept younger sister to be at the place of mother-in-law; the property and status to be secured in this way or policy is socially hampered the 2 sisters relations. The audiences were not matured overall to get the message of the film that time. Paro insisted to have an inheritant from her sister Shibo and her father-in-law Gajjan Singh.To respect her feelings in this battle of power Shibo sacrificed her choice and love but lost her sister Paro and Gajjan and Bhinder become his guardian again. Yes, drama was full filled public demand but the public must have a shocking impression always. Every film comes out to offer a newness to audience, in that sense it is interesting. Smita's acting was profound and realistic as a Punjabi village-girl, beside her Amrita played a bit more glamorous role well enough. The Amrish Puri-Kulbhushan scenes are nicely acted also.


== Cast ==
Smita Patil as Paramjeet 'Paaro'
Raj Babbar as Binder
Amrish Puri as Dulla Singh
Amrita Singh as Seebo
Raj Kiran as Sharvan Singh
Kulbhushan Kharbanda as Gajjan Singh
Pradeep Kumar as Kishan Singh
Sushma Seth as Paaro's Mother
Navneet Nishan as Channo
Javed Khan as Chhote
Avtar Gill as Daara
Sudhir Pandey as Thaana
Ramesh Tiwari as Thekedaar
Amrit Pal as Sarpanch Gursharan Singh
Anjana Mumtaz as Seebo's real mother
Pradeep Kumar as Kishan Singh
Deep Dhillon as Police Inspector
Rekha Dubbing voice for Smita Patil
Sardar Sohi as Hawaaldar Hridaymal Murari Lal
Shashi Bala as Laajo


== Soundtrack ==
Music by Uttam Singh & Jagdish Sodhi and lyrics by Verma Malik. All songs recorded in stereophonic sound.

"Mere Pyaar Ki Umar Ho Itani Sanam" - Manmohan Singh, Lata Mangeshkar
"Ghata Cha Gayi Hai Bahaar Aa Gayi Hai" - Suresh Wadkar, Lata Mangeshkar
"Husn Ki Vaadiyo Me" - Lata Mangeshkar, Kishore Kumar
"Ghunghat Utha Ke Na Dekh" - Lata Mangeshkar
"Khud Ko Samajh Na Akeli" - Kishore Kumar
"Aaj Maati Sunaye Kahani O Duniya Tu Yaad Rakhna" (Sad) - Mahendra Kapoor
"Oh Duniya Tu Yaad Rakhna" - Mahendra Kapoor
"Aare Mujhe Tare Mujhe" - Asha Bhosle
"Jholi Me Heere Ho Tere" - Lata Mangeshkar


== References ==


== External links ==
Waaris on IMDb