Title: Waris (serial)
Aspects: {'Waaris'}

Waris (Urdu: وارث‎) is a Pakistani television drama serial created by PTV, written by Amjad Islam Amjad, directed by Ghazanfer Ali and Nusrat Thakur. The first episode was aired from PTV-Lahore on Saturday 29th December 1979 and the last on 22 March 1980 and was an acclaimed mega hit. The show had 13 episodes, which is a traditional PTV drama serial format; with each episode almost one hour long.


== Plot ==
A Pakistani feudal lord (zamindar), Chaudhry Hashmat (Mehboob Alam) rules his fiefdom, Sikandarpur with an iron grip.  Along with his son Yaqub and two grandsons Chaudhry Anwar Ali (Firdous Jamal) and Chaudhry Niaz Ali (sons of his deceased son Chaudhry Ghulam Ali) he struggles hold on to land, (Sikanderpur) which is the proposed site for a dam.
The two grandsons are constantly at loggerheads. The younger one, Chaudhry Anwar is a prodigal scion of a feudal family. He is also ruthless, in the likeness of his grandfather, Chaudhry Hashmat.  The older one, Chaudhry Niaz Ali wishes to escape to the big city, Lahore, but is trapped in the feudal web.There is vicious intra-family feudal politics at play. Yaqub is eyeing the entire estate of his father Ch Hashmat, attempting to pit Ch Anwar against his older brother Ch Niaz. His machinations are carried out by Mauladad, who is an employee (servant) of Ch Anwar. Mauladad is a tough, wily guy employed by Ch Anwar to carry out hit-jobs, abductions, etc.
Fateh Sher is an unknown guy his identity will reveal at climax. Fateh Sher fled to Sikandarpur with his wife Zohra. Zohra was originally engaged to the older nephew of the Chaudhry of Ahmadpur, Hayat Muhamad. Another lead character, Dilawar is the younger nephew of Hayat Muhammad. Zohra's marriage with Fateh Sher causes strife in the village and they have to run for their lives. After moving to Sikandarpur, they start a new life and Fateh Sher assumes a new identity .
Meanwhile, a blood feud ensues between the families of Hayat Muhammad and that of Fateh Sher. In rural Punjanbi culture, it is a huge insult for a man if his fiancé marries someone else. To avenge this grave insult, Dilawar's older brother launches a failed attack on Fetah Sher's village, where police were lying in wait in anticipation of an attack.  To save his older brother, Dilawar gives a false statement to the police saying he launched the attack and not his brother. For this (false) acknowledgement Dilawar is sentenced to ten years in prison. While Dilawar is serving his term, his older brother goes out to seek and kill Fateh Sher. But before he can get to Fteh Sher, Fateh Sher kills him.  These events catalyze a deep rage and hatred in Dilawar against Fateh Sher. Upon his release from prison he only has one purpose in life, to seeks out and kill Fateh Sher.
Fateh Sher was last spotted in Sikandarpur, the fiefdom of Ch Hashmat. It is very difficult for any outsider to come to Sikandarpur without attracting the scrutiny of Ch Hashmat and his servants. To get to Sikandarpur, Dilawar starts working as a servant for Yaqub in Lahore. When Chaudhry Hashmat visits his son Yaqub in Lahore to purchase a high-pedigree dog (Crystal) from Saulat Mirza, the latter turns down all offers, infuriating Ch Hashmat who is not used to taking no for an answer. Seizing the opportunity to earn Ch Hashmat's favor, Dilawar steals the prized dog, Crystal, from Saulat Mirza and brings it to Ch Hashmat. This act endears Dilawar to Ch Hashmat and he comes into his inner circle of confidants and servants. Ch Hashmat takes Dilawar with him to Sikandarpur.
Ironically, the first and only true friend Dilawar makes in Sikandarpur is Mauladad, who in reality is his nemesis Fateh Sher - the person Dilawar is seeking to find and kill.


== Cast ==
Abid Ali as Dilawar
Mehboob Alam as Chaudhry Hashmat Khan
Uzma Gillani as Zakiya, widow of Chaudhry Ghulam Ali who is the deceased son of Chaudhry Hashmat
Samina Ahmad as Sughra, wife of Chaudhry Niaz Ali
Firdous Jamal as Chaudhry Anwar Ali
Ghayyur Akhtar as Qazi
Munawwar Saeed as Chaudhry Yaqub
Tahira Naqvi as Seemi
Shujaat Hashmi as Mauladad
Aurangzaib Laghari as Chaudhry Niaz Ali
Agha Sikander as a farrukh


== Notes ==


== References ==
Published by : Sanga e mail publishers .
Daily Times, Pakistan. 8 July 2011 https://web.archive.org/web/20110817024746/http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/default.asp?page=2011%5C07%5C08%5Cstory_8-7-2011_pg9_13. Archived from the original on 17 August 2011. Retrieved 3 November 2018. 
Pakistan Paedia


== External links ==
Waris on IMDb
Pakistani Drama