Title: WABG-TV
Aspects: {'WABG'}

WABG-TV, virtual channel 6 (UHF digital channel 32), is a dual ABC/Fox-affiliated television station licensed to Greenwood, Mississippi, United States and serving the Delta area of Northwestern Mississippi. Owned by Northwest Broadcasting, it is sister to two low-power stations: Grenada-licensed NBC affiliate WNBD-LD (channel 33) and Cleveland-licensed CBS affiliate WXVT-LD (channel 17); Northwest also operates Greenville-licensed Ion Television affiliate WFXW (channel 15) under a shared services agreement (SSA) with owner John Wagner. The four stations share studios on Washington Avenue in Greenville; WABG-TV's transmitter is located northeast of Inverness, Mississippi.


== History ==
WABG-TV's first broadcast was on October 20, 1959 on VHF channel 6. Originally it was a CBS affiliate, with a secondary affiliation with ABC owing to WABG radio (960 AM)'s affiliation with ABC Radio. In 1966, the station built a 1,200-foot (366 m) tower near Inverness and increased its power output to 100,000 watts. Following its completion in October 1966, WABG dropped CBS to become a full-time ABC affiliate in November 1966. Until then, the only areas of the state to receive a sole ABC affiliate were the northwest (from Memphis' WHBQ-TV) and the Gulf Coast (from WVUE in New Orleans). Until future sister station WXVT signed on in 1980, WJTV in Jackson served as the default CBS affiliate for the southern counties in the Delta area, while WREG-TV in Memphis served the northern half of the market, Mississippi cities like Kosciusko received WABG-TV on their analog television set as their default ABC station from 1970 to 2009. WAPT in Jackson did not have a strong signal on analog television in the Kosciusko area.
The station was a major beneficiary of a quirk in the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)'s plan for allocating stations. In the early days of broadcast television, there were twelve VHF channels available and 69 UHF channels (later reduced to 55 in 1983). The VHF bands were more desirable because they carried longer distances. Since there were only twelve VHF channels available, there were limitations as to how closely the stations could be spaced.
After the FCC's Sixth Report and Order ended the license freeze and opened the UHF band in 1952, it devised a plan for allocating VHF licenses. Under this plan, almost all of the country would be able to receive two commercial VHF channels plus one noncommercial channel. Most of the rest of the country ("1/2") would be able to receive a third VHF channel. Other areas would be designated as "UHF islands" since they were too close to larger cities for VHF service. The "2" networks became CBS and NBC, "+1" represented non-commercial educational stations, and "1/2" became ABC (which was the weakest network usually winding up with the UHF allocation where no VHF was available).
However, what would become of the Greenville market is sandwiched between Memphis (channels 3, 5, 10, and 13) to the north, Alexandria, Louisiana (channel 5) to the west, Jackson, Mississippi (channels 3 and 12) to the south, Jackson, Tennessee (channels 7 and 11) to the northeast, and Columbus/Tupelo, Mississippi (channels 2, 4, and 9) to the east. This created a "doughnut" in Northwestern Mississippi where there could only be one VHF license. Broadcaster Cy N. Bahakel of Charlotte, North Carolina, owner of WABG radio, was fortunate to gain that license, and consequently became the only television station to serve the Delta region until WMAO-TV signed on in 1972; the market would not gain another commercial station until WXVT signed on in 1980. Although there was no station operating on channel 8 in the immediate area, KNOE-TV in Monroe, Louisiana had been operating in that community on channel 8 since 1953, and it was well within the FCC-mandated interference limit for co-channel separation to allow a channel 8 allocation to Greenwood.
On September 5, 2007, WABG announced that it was being sold from Bahakel Communications to local businessman Charles Harker and his company, Commonwealth Broadcasting, pending FCC approval. The sale was finalized on October 29. On July 13, 2010, Commonwealth announced plans to launch new low-powered station, WNBD-LD, as the area's first locally based NBC affiliate; prior to WNBD's launch, NBC was seen in the market through Memphis' WMC-TV or Jackson's WLBT on area cable systems, as well as over-the-air on the edges of the market. Commonwealth also has a license for WFXW-LD channel 17, which is licensed to Cleveland and shares WABG's tower in Inverness. The unused callsign WFXW-LD would become WXVT-LD on June 26, 2017.On May 4, 2012, Saga Communications, owner of WXVT, announced it was selling WXVT to H3 Communications, a company owned by the adult children of Charles Harker. On January 28, 2013, the FCC granted the sale of WXVT, and it was completed two days later.  Commonwealth then took over WXVT's operations, effectively bringing all of the Delta's Big Three network stations under the control of one company.
In 2015, WABG and WXVT appeared in a TruTV reality series Breaking Greenville. It premiered January 29, 2015 and ended on March 26, 2015.
Commonwealth Broadcasting Group agreed to sell WABG-TV, WNBD-LD, and WFXW-LD to Cala Broadcast Partners for $11.7 million on October 30, 2015. Cala is jointly owned by Brian Brady (who owns several other television stations, mostly under the Northwest Broadcasting name) and Jason Wolff (who owns radio and television stations through Frontier Radio Management). Concurrently with this acquisition, Cala agreed to purchase WXVT from H3 Communications; a month later, it assigned its right to purchase that station to John Wagner. The sale was completed on August 1, 2016. On January 1, 2017, Cable One removed channels owned by Northwest Broadcasting (WABG-TV, WXVT, WABG-DT2 and WNBD-LD) after the two companies failed to reach an agreement. On February 1, 2017, the channels were restored to Cable One's lineup under a new carriage deal.


== WABG-DT2 ==
WABG-DT2 is the Fox-affiliated second digital subchannel of WABG-TV, broadcasting in 720p high definition on UHF channel 32.2 (or virtual channel 6.2 via PSIP).


=== History ===

On September 13, 2006, WABG launched a Fox affiliate, "Delta Fox 10," on a new second digital subchannel. Previously, the national Foxnet service provided Fox programming to cable subscribers in the Delta area, which was one of the last markets to be offered the service. The cable-only service originally planned to close down on September 1, 2006 but was delayed until September 12 to allow WABG time to set up the new affiliate. When WABG-DT2 started operations, it was not a 24-hour station. "Delta Fox" aired programming from 5:00 p.m. to 10:35 p.m. weekdays, 4:00 p.m. to 10:30 p.m. on Saturdays, and 5:00 p.m. to 10:35 p.m. on Sundays. "Delta Fox" aired all Fox Sports programming on weekends regardless of starting time. On October 26, 2009, DeltaFOX 10 started broadcasting 20 hours of programming Monday through Friday along with extended hours on the weekends.


== Digital channels ==
The station's digital signal is multiplexed:


=== Analog-to-digital conversion ===
WABG-TV shut down its analog signal, over VHF channel 6, on February 17, 2009 at 11:59 p.m., as part of the federally mandated transition from analog to digital television. The station's digital signal remained on its pre-transition UHF channel 32, using PSIP to display WABG's virtual channel as 6 on digital television receivers.


== Availability ==
On cable, ABC 6 can be seen on Suddenlink channel 4 and in high definition on digital channel 720; while Delta Fox 10 is carried on Suddenlink channel 10 and in high definition on digital channel 705. ABC 6 can also be seen on Cable One channel 6 and in high definition on digital channel 1006; while Delta Fox 10 is carried on Cable One channel 10 and in high definition on digital channel 1010.
On satellite, ABC 6 can be seen on DirecTV channel 6; while Delta Fox 10 is carried on DirecTV channel 7. ABC 6 can also be seen on Dish Network channel 6; while Delta Fox 10 is carried on Dish Network channel 10.


== Programming ==
Syndicated programming on ABC 6 includes Live with Kelly and Ryan, The Doctors, Dr. Oz, Dr. Phil, and Entertainment Tonight. Syndicated programming on Delta Fox 10 includes The Wendy Williams Show, Divorce Court, Jerry Springer, Maury, Access, and Family Feud.


== Newscasts ==
As of August 2016, all four networks including WABG-TV (ABC & Fox), WXVT-LD (CBS), and WNBD-LD (NBC) have consolidated under one branding, The Delta News. The Delta News studios and offices are located on Washington Avenue in Greenville. The new ownership includes local newscasts on all four networks. In 2019, the Delta News team also began producing newscasts for new sister station KLAX-TV in Alexandria, Louisiana.


== See also ==
Channel 6 virtual TV stations in the United States
Channel 10 branded TV stations in the United States
Channel 32 digital TV stations in the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Query the FCC's TV station database for WABG-TV
BIAfn's Media Web Database -- Information on WABG-TV