Title: X5 Retail Group
Aspects: {'X5'}

X5 Retail Group is a leading Russian food retailer.The Company operates several retail formats: proximity stores under the Pyaterochka brand, supermarkets under the Perekrestok brand and hypermarkets under the Karusel brand.
The Company’s global depositary receipts are listed on the London Stock Exchange (LSE) and the Moscow Stock Exchange (MSE).


== History ==
In 1995, the first Perekrestok store was opened in Moscow. In 1999, Pyaterochka retail chain was founded and the first store was opened in Saint Petersburg. In 2005, Pyaterochka completed an IPO on the London Stock Exchange.
X5 was founded in May 2006 after the merger of the Pyaterochka and Perekrestok retail formats. In 2008, X5 acquired the Karusel hypermarket chain.
Other major acquisitions included: 82 Paterson supermarkets (2009), more than 660 Kopeyka stores (2010), 103 Pokupochka stores in the Samara region (2014), 104 stores owned by the Rosinka Group in Southwest Russia and 100 stores owned by the Soseddushka retail chain in the Orenburg region (2015) and 99 Polushka stores in Bashkortostan (2018). In 2018, X5 GDRs started trading on the Moscow Exchange.


== Shareholder structure ==
In 2018, X5’s shareholder structure is as follows: CTF Holdings S.A. (structure of Alfa Group): 47.86%; Intertrust Trustees Ltd (Axon Trust): 11.43%; X5 Directors: 0.06%; treasury shares: 0.01%, shareholders with less than 3%: 40.63%.


=== Dividend policy ===
In 2017, the Company approved its dividend policy.
The key principles of the dividend policy are as follows:
1) The dividend policy sets a target payout ratio of at least 25% of X5 Retail Group’s consolidated IFRS net profit, provided that the Company’s financial position allows for it. 
2) When considering a dividend proposal to the General Meeting of Shareholders, the Supervisory Board will be guided by a target consolidated net debt/EBITDA ratio of below 2.0x, in line with the Company’s financing strategy.
The ultimate decision on payment of dividends will always be subject to approval of the General Meeting of Shareholders. 


== Management ==
In 2012, Stephan DuCharme was appointed the Company’s CEO and the Chairman of the Management Board.In 2015, Igor Shekhterman was appointed as the Company’s CEO and Stephan DuCharme appointed as the Chairman of Supervisory Board.


== Retail formats ==

Each of the Company’s brands offers a unique customer value proposition and targets key parts of the Russian consumer population. This multifaceted strategy enables X5 Retail Group to capture a significant portion of the growth that is forecast for each of the three largest segments of Russia’s food retail market.


=== Pyaterochka ===

Pyaterochka is the Company’s largest retail format, with 11,225 proximity stores as of December 2017 serving customers in convenient locations in around 2,500 cities and towns across Russia. The Pyaterochka CVP appeals to a wide swath of the Russian population, with a large assortment of fresh goods and a loyalty programme launched in 2017 that offers personalised promos based on each individual customer’s shopping behaviour.


=== Perekrestok ===

The Perekrestok supermarket format is Russia’s oldest and largest.


=== Karusel ===
Karusel focusses on compact hypermarkets located within city limits. 


== Activities ==


=== Operational and financial results ===
As of 31 December 2017, the Company operated 12,121 stores, including 11,225 Pyaterochka proximity stores, 638 Perekrestok supermarkets, 93 Karusel hypermarkets and 165 convenience stores. The Company operated 39 distribution centers and 3,144 of its own trucks across the Russian Federation.


=== Partnership projects ===

In 2013, X5 Retail Group kicked off a programme to attract sublessees, and by the end of 2017, over 29,000 retail outlets were opened in X5 stores by 5,500 private enterprises. With 5,000 sublessees, Pyaterochka leads the way in the number of partners accounting for over 8% of its total selling space. More than 3,000 of them are farmers and small and medium-sized enterprises selling food and children’s goods and providing everyday services near the cash desks outside Pyaterochka’s shopping area or inside as a shop-in-shop.
In April 2017, X5 Retail Group launched a cooperation project with the Central Union of Consumer Societies of the Russian Federation (Centrosoyuz). The COOP-Pyaterochka format has the potential to add up to 1,000 stores over a three-year period. The parties have also agreed to open to 5,000 Pyaterocka-based shop-in-shop corners by 2021 to sell farmers’ and consumer cooperatives’ products.
In June 2017, X5 Retail Group, Acmero Capital Limited and Marathon Group partnered up to develop universal Passenger Service Centres at airports and bus and railway stations. They plan to open around 600–1,000 Passenger Service Centres by the end of 2021. Such centres are expected to feature a Pyaterochka grocery store, a pharmacy, a café, a ticket booth, an ATM, and a payment terminal, etc.


== IT and innovations ==
In October 2016, X5 Retail Group launched GoCargo for online booking of cargo transportation services. GoCargo enables senders to place transportation orders and distributes them among registered private carriers and transport companies based on the cargo location and the shipping address. The parties exchange legal documents using the EDI technology.
In June 2017, X5 Retail Group and the Internet Initiatives Development Fund (IIDF) launched a specialised retail accelerator, with the Petrovich and Sportmaster chains among its partners. Start-up companies joining the IIDF accelerator programme are able not only to attract from RUB 2 mn to RUB 25 mn of investments from the fund, but also to get advice from X5 experts and test their business ideas on X5’s anonymised database of over 3 bn purchases.
In November 2017, X5 introduced machine learning to bolster targeted marketing at the Perekrestok supermarket chain, and developed personalised offers for all members of the Perekrestok Club loyalty program. The company leverages machine learning to group customers into segments based on common features and create offers for them. The system analyses groups of customers and designs personalised marketing campaigns based on demographic and several hundred behavioural factors, such as: frequency of purchases and ticket size, customer preferences, lifestyle fundamentals, acceptable price levels, favourite product categories and preferred shopping hours. Customer sensitivity to offers is predicted using various analytical models. In addition, the system picks out the most efficient communication channels for a target audience and automatically generates marketing messages.
In December 2017, Mail.Ru Group and X5 launched a partnership in online advertising targeting and assessing its impact on offline sales in certain stores. MyTarget platform clients gain access to X5’s anonymised data on consumer behaviour with a view to enhancing the accuracy of ad targeting and linking ad impression data with sales performance at the Pyaterochka, Perekrestok and Karusel chains.In February 2018, X5 launched an online service that helps real estate owners to calculate the average rent at any location where Pyaterochka has a presence. The service also enables landlords to offer premises or a property for lease or sale instantly, if the property meets all the criteria for store opening, or offer a land plot for building a store.In May 2018, X5 successfully completed a large-scale project to automate the processes of demand and replenishment planning at both stores and at Perekrestok and Karusel distribution centres. To this end, the Company redesigned its core logistics, marketing and sales processes, and introduced an end-to-end system of supply chain management, boosting forecast accuracy by 17% and increasing on-shelf availability of products by 5%. The Company also reduced inventory levels by 13%.In May 2018, X5 introduced automated detailed planogramming for hypermarkets. It factors in store equipment characteristics, customer preferences, historical data on inventory turnover by type of product, assortment by category, packaging size and type, etc. After three months of its use, the system boosted sales by up to 10.5% in some categories.In June 2018, X5 started implementing video analytics and computer vision technology based on neural networks and artificial intelligence. It speeds up control of store layouts and the number of products on shelves by a factor of ten, and reduces the number of people leaving the store without a purchase and shrinkage levels by 10% and 20%, respectively.


== Logistics ==
X5 started implementing its logistics separation strategy in 2013, with a view to splitting product flows for convenience stores, on the one hand, and supermarkets and hypermarkets, on the other hand.
As at 31 December 2017, X5 Retail Group operated 39 distribution centres spanning 1.1 million sq m, including 27 centres catering to Pyaterochka and 12 centres serving the super- and hypermarket formats (Perekrestok and Karusel).As at 31 December 2017, X5’s fleet comprises 3,144 owned trucks.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website