Title: X17 particle
Aspects: {'X17'}

The X17 particle is a hypothetical subatomic particle proposed by Attila Krasznahorkay as the cause of anomalous measurement results at 17 MeV. The X17 particle would be the force carrier for a hypothetical fifth force, likely connected with dark matter, and has been described as a 'protophobic X boson' with a mass of 17 MeV. The particle has been proposed to explain anomalous angles consistently observed in the decay of beryllium-8 atoms since 2015, and observed once in He atoms in November 2019.


== History ==
In 2015, Krasznahorkay and his colleagues at ATOMKI posited the existence of a new, light boson (17 MeV) only 34 times heavier than the electron. In an effort to find a dark photon, the Hungarian team fired protons at thin targets of lithium-7, which created unstable beryllium-8 nuclei that then decayed and spat out pairs of electrons and positrons. Excess decays were observed at an opening angle of 140° between the e+ and e− and a combined energy of 17 MeV, which indicated that a small fraction of beryllium-8 will shed excess energy in the form of a new particle. The result was successfully repeated both by Krasznahorkay and by a separate team working in America.In 2016, Jonathan Feng et al., proposed that a protophobic X-boson with a mass of 16.7 MeV with suppressed couplings to protons relative to neutrons and electrons and femtometer range could explain the data. The force may explain m-2 muon anomaly and provide a dark matter candidate. Several research experiments are underway to attempt to validate or refute these results.In November 2019, it was announced by Krasznahorkay that he and his team at ATOMKI had successfully observed the same anomalies in the decay of stable helium atoms as had been observed in beryllium-8, strengthening the case for the X17 particle's existence. This prompted significant press coverage, focusing largely on the implications that the existence of the X17 particle and a corresponding fifth force would have in the search for dark matter. Speaking to The Independent, Krasznahorkay said "if the particle’s existence is confirmed, it means physicists will have to finally reassess the interactions of the existing four fundamental forces of particle physics and make space for a fifth."


== See also ==
Fifth force
Graviton
X and Y bosons


== References ==


== External links ==
X17 particle – Google Search