Title: Bizana, Eastern Cape
Aspects: {'XAF'}

Bizana is a town in the Eastern Cape province of South Africa. It is the seat of the Mbizana Local Municipality.
Over and above a Number of community clinics Bizana has a provincial hospital, named St Patrick's Hospital.There is also a hospital called Greenville hospital in the eTyeni area of Imizizi Administrative area. Right at the front opposite of Winnie Nomzamo Madikizela Mandela's home in Mbhongweni location of Amangutyana administrative area there is a hospital that is being built. The construction is currently under way as at May 2018.  Winnie Mandela, ex-wife of Nelson Mandela, was born here in 1936.Oliver Reginald Tambo (popularly known as OR Tambo which the international airport in Johannesburg is named after) was also born and grew up in this town. The town has many surrounding villages.


== Entertainment and nature ==
The famous and very beautiful Wild Coast Sun casino and hotel by Sun international group is also nestled near Bizana. Wild Coast Sun has hosted Idols SA theatre week in 2016 and 2017. This small dynamite doesn't only boast very beautiful landscape but also has tourism resort in the Mpunzi area. Bizana is in the Wild coast area and has beautiful beaches one of them is silver beach where the hotel complex is located and a very beautiful and peaceful beach in the Xholobeni area.
Xholobeni is also endowed with some mineral resources hence the recent fights about possible mining in the area which has led to court cases between the people and the government as the Bizana community doesn't want their land to be touched and be left in ruins. 
Bizana is on the border between Kwa-Zulu Natal and Eastern cape province and falls in the EC Province. The local language is isiMpondo, almost all locals can  speak both isiXhosa and Zulu fluently. Crime rates are very low in this closeknit community.


== Education ==
Bizana has many primary and secondary schools to serve the community. Mr Clement Sandile Nteta, who is one of the unsung heroes of the struggle for liberation was a key incognito ANC operative. Nteta clandestinely ensured a safe passage for many of the ANC stalwarts into exile. During the periods of the 1970's and 1980's Clement Nteta continued his fight against apartheid by creating and instilling a culture of education in the region. He was instrumental in developing schools and an education system which delivered quality education to learners. Many of his students are prominent members of government as a consequence of the foundation he built. He was the president of the Retired Teachers Association at the time of his death in 2017. He was leading the fight for teachers to be paid for their years of service and pensions they have not received since retirement. His influence has culminated in there being a new Further Education and Training institution called Ingwe FET.


== 1986 bombing ==
On 18 April 1986, two people were killed and several others injured when a bomb, set up by Phumzile Mayaphi, exploded at the Wild Coast Casino near Bizana. Mayaphi was charged and convicted of murder and sabotage, and was sentenced to death on 12 May 1989. The African National Congress denied responsibility for the attack.


== References ==