Title: Minecraft: Story Mode
Aspects: {'Xara (disambiguation)'}

Minecraft: Story Mode is an episodic point-and-click graphic adventure video game developed and published by Telltale Games, based on the sandbox video game Minecraft. The first five episodes of the game were released between October 2015 through March 2016, and an additional three episodes were released as downloadable content in mid-2016. The game was released for Microsoft Windows, macOS, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Wii U, Nintendo Switch, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Android, iOS, Apple TV, and browser through Netflix. The game was developed in association with Mojang, the original developer of Minecraft. A retail version was released in December 2016.The game follows the episodic format that Telltale Games used for its titles The Walking Dead, The Wolf Among Us, Tales from the Borderlands, and Game of Thrones. The game centers around a new character named Jesse, who can be either male or female, as they and their allies attempt to save their world by defeating the Wither Storm.
A second five-episode season was released by Telltale in July 2017, continuing the story from the first season and influenced by players' choices made during that season.
Both games are no longer available for download because of Telltale Games' closing in the fall of 2018.


== Gameplay ==
Minecraft: Story Mode is an episodic interactive comedy-drama point-and-click graphic adventure video game. It was released as a number of episodes similar to Telltale Games' other games. Players can collect items, solve puzzles, and talk to non-player characters through conversation trees to learn about the story and determine what to do next. Decisions that the player makes affect events in both the current episode and later episodes. However, Minecraft: Story Mode is intended to be a family-friendly title, unlike Telltale's previous games, which tend to carry more mature or emotional overtones (including the death of major characters). As such, the decisions are intended to be pivotal and emotional but not to involve mature imagery or themes. Elements of crafting and building were included in the gameplay which are central to Minecraft. The game includes combat and other action sequences, carried out through both quick time events and more arcade-like controls, such as steering around debris on a road.


== Synopsis ==


=== Setting ===
Minecraft: Story Mode takes place in an interpretation of the world of Minecraft, where the game is the extent of the characters' universe, and the characters are unaware that they are in a game. The main character, Jesse, is an inexperienced resident of said universe who sets out on a journey with his/her friends within the world of Minecraft to find The Order of the Stone (Gabriel the Warrior, Ellegaard the Redstone Engineer, Magnus the Rogue, Soren the Architect and Ivor the Potion Brewer and Enchanter), five legendary adventurers who saved the Minecraft world. The game includes settings that are normally difficult to access from within Minecraft, including the Nether and The End.


=== Characters ===
The player can customize Jesse, including choice of gender and skin tone. Jesse is voiced by Patton Oswalt if male and by Catherine Taber if female. Other main characters within the Minecraft: Story Mode world include Jesse's friends Petra (voiced by Ashley Johnson), Axel (Brian Posehn), Olivia (Martha Plimpton), Lukas (Scott Porter), and Jesse's pet pig, Reuben (Dee Bradley Baker); secondary characters include The Order of the Stone: Gabriel (Dave Fennoy), Magnus (Corey Feldman), Ellegaard (Grey Griffin), Soren (John Hodgman) and Ivor (Paul Reubens); and background characters include Maya, Ivy and a Fangirl (GK Bowes); Owen (Owen Hill); Gill (Phil LaMarr); Aiden and Otis (Matthew Mercer); the EnderCon Usher (Jason 'jtop' Topolski); a Fanboy (Billy West); Lydia (Lydia Winters); and the EnderCon Building Competition Announcer (Erin Yvette). Stauffer said that the human characters as a whole represent the different types of gamers who play Minecraft. Billy West narrates the first four episodes of the story.


=== Plot ===
This is a broad overview of the plot. Certain decisions made by the player will alter details of specific events.


==== Season 1 (2015–16) ====


===== The Order of the Stone (Episode 1) =====
Jesse (Patton Oswalt or Catherine Taber) and his/her friends, Olivia (Martha Plimpton) and Axel (Brian Posehn), along with his/her pet pig Reuben (Dee Bradley Baker), prepare for the annual EnderCon building competition, which they lose every year to a rival team called the Ocelots. This year, they build a fireworks machine decorated as one of three Minecraft mobs, which threatens to win this year. Ocelot member Aiden (Matthew Mercer) becomes extremely jealous, and in his rage accidentally releases a flow of lava nearby. This scares off Reuben and threatens to destroy the fireworks machine. Jesse either goes after Reuben alone and leaves Axel and Olivia to save the fireworks machine, or brings Axel and Olivia, which results in the fireworks machine going up in flames. Jesse (if he/she brought his/her friends, they separate) ventures into the woods to find Reuben. Just as Reuben is found, Jesse and Reuben are surrounded by hostile mobs, and Jesse may tell Reuben to run or stay behind him/her as he/she tries to fight off the mobs. He/she is quickly overpowered by a spider, when suddenly his/her friend Petra (Ashley Johnson) appears and kills it. She takes Jesse (and Reuben) to a nearby cave for safety, where she tells him/her that she wants him/her to come along as she trades a Wither Skeleton Skull for a diamond.
At EnderCon, Jesse and friends (potentially without Reuben) meet up and either celebrate their victory at the building competition, or bemoan their loss. They split up again, and Petra brings Jesse (and Reuben) to the meeting place. Unfortunately, Ivor (Paul Reubens), the man Petra sells the skull to, rips her off and flees. Jesse and Petra, joined by Axel, Olivia, the kind Ocelot leader, Lukas (Scott Porter), and eventually Reuben, follow Ivor into an underground laboratory. There, they discover him making a Wither (with a Command Block in the middle of the statue used to summon it), but are unable to stop him. The creature attacks EnderCon, targeting Gabriel (Dave Fennoy), a member of the Order of the Stone, who is a guest speaker at EnderCon and seems to know Ivor. Ivor soon loses control of the Wither as it uses its Command Block to suck up blocks to make itself bigger. Ivor had a potion to stop it in just such a case, but mischief on Axel's/Jesse's part causes this plan to fail. The Wither breaks out of the convention and starts sucking up blocks (and people) from all around, having transformed into a giant, more horrific creature known as the Wither Storm. It continues to follow Gabriel (and Jesse and his/her friends, who Gabriel instructed to follow him) as it destroys the town, forcing the group to escape into Gabriel's fortress. Gabriel sends Jesse's group through the Nether to find Order members Magnus and Ellegaard, and gives them an amulet to guide them. They are forced to leave Petra and Gabriel behind, but right before going through the Nether portal, Jesse must either save Petra or Gabriel from the Wither Storm's tractor beams.
In the Nether, Jesse and friends confront Ivor (who followed them into the Nether). He points out a nearby minecart track system left by the Order, and he drinks a potion of invisibility. The friends use the tracks to find their way to the Overworld, where the group decides to bunk for the night. Axel is bitter towards Lukas for not helping when Petra was in danger. Jesse must settle their conflict by siding with Axel or Lukas, or simply forcing them to calm down. The next morning, the group arrives at the Order fortress. There they discover that Ivor had actually been a member of the Order, but had been inexplicably kicked out, revealing Ivor and Gabriel's apparent history together. They also find a contraption that, when connected to the amulet, shows on a map the current locations of the members of the Order. Lukas decides to stay and fortify the fortress, and asks that one of the four stay with him. Jesse must choose to seek out one of two members of the Order: Magnus the Rogue (a master TNT mechanic) with Axel (leaving Olivia to help Lukas), or Ellegaard the Engineer (a master redstone mechanic), with Olivia (leaving Axel to help Lukas). As Jesse and Axel/Olivia prepare to leave, they can see the Wither Storm in the distance, approaching them.


===== Assembly Required (Episode 2) =====
Jesse and Axel or Olivia use the Nether minecart system to get to Boom Town or Redstonia and bring Magnus (Corey Feldman) or Ellegaard (Grey Griffin) back to help them. After successfully finding him/her and bringing him/her back, they return to the temple and discover that Petra or Gabriel, the one Jesse saved before entering the Nether in Episode One, has arrived at the temple. He/she also finds that Olivia or Axel (whoever was left to help Lukas) has, on their own, left and retrieved Ellegaard or Magnus (the one that Jesse didn't retrieve himself/herself). It is very quickly revealed that Ellegaard and Magnus are very aggressive towards each other, and it is difficult to get them to work together. Returning to the Order-tracking contraption, Jesse discovers that it now shows the location of the last, long thought lost member, Soren, not too far away. It also shows Ivor, who is heading towards Soren. Ellegaard reveals that an incredibly powerful explosive, dubbed the Formidi-Bomb, is in Soren's possession, and proposes this as a solution to the problem of the Wither Storm. The group leaves to find Soren and his secret lab. Soon after arriving, Magnus and Ellegaard get into an argument that results in them departing alone in two different directions to find the "F-Bomb." Jesse must follow one, and when Petra/Gabriel states that she/he has something private to discuss with him/her, Lukas, Olivia and Axel agree to follow the other Order member, and they separate. As they walk, Petra/Gabriel reveals to Jesse that, despite his/her saving her/him, Petra's/Gabriel's close proximity with the Storm resulted in her/him getting infected by Wither Sickness, which is getting worse by the minute. As Jesse ventures deep into Soren's lab, he/she comes across Ivor. Petra/Gabriel fights him, and they state their plan to destroy the Wither Storm with the Formidi-Bomb. Just as Jesse's friends (except Magnus and Ellegaard) are reunited, Ivor traps them in a library, while stating that the Order cannot defeat the Wither Storm, much less make it out alive.


===== The Last Place You Look (Episode 3) =====
Jesse, Axel, Olivia, Lukas, and Petra/Gabriel, with much work, escape from the library. They then find themselves in an automated mob farm apparently built by Soren (John Hodgeman), while using the amulet to follow his trail. Upon escaping, they come across an End Portal that Soren must have gone through; the friends follow suit. When they appear in the End, they follow Soren into his home, where they find him studying and experimenting with Endermen. Jesse convinces Soren to donate his Formidi-Bomb to help destroy the Wither Storm, but, through a series of Enderman-related mishaps, they are forced to evacuate Soren's house with it completely underwater. They return to the overworld, where Soren gives Jesse the ingredients to make a Formidi-Bomb (not actually having created one). They finally reunite with Magnus and Ellegaard. Soren asks for a volunteer to set off the Formidi-Bomb, informing them that the bomb will explode within seconds of being made. Jesse volunteers. Magnus and Ellegaard offer their armor to protect him/her while building the bomb, and Jesse must choose which set to take.
Jesse allows himself/herself to be drawn close to the Storm by a tractor beam. While Jesse's friends build distractions to keep the Wither Storm moving as Jesse is crafting the Bomb, one of the Storm's attacks seriously injures Magnus or Ellegaard (the one whose armor Jesse accepted). Jesse launches the bomb towards the monster, and his/her friends use a fishing rod to pull him/her far enough away from the explosion to emerge unscathed. The explosion instantly kills the Wither Storm. Unfortunately, Magnus or Ellegaard passes away shortly afterward from the injuries he/she sustained. The friends then find that everyone that the Wither Storm sucked into itself are still alive, and have been freed with the Storm's destruction. While Jesse helps them out and examines the wreckage, he/she comes across the fully intact Command Block in the middle of the Storm. It suddenly re-activates and starts resurrecting the Wither Storm - now in three parts. Jesse is almost pulled into the newly-formed Wither Storms, but suddenly Gabriel or Petra, the one Jesse did not save and was just freed from the Storm, pulls him/her to safety. Jesse begins to run, but soon finds out that Gabriel/Petra is completely amnesiac.


===== A Block and a Hard Place (Episode 4) =====
The group is forced to flee the three new Storms. They regroup in a nearby cave and discuss the events of the day, with Petra/Gabriel, the one Jesse saved in Episode One, becoming incredibly ill, and Gabriel/Petra, the one the Wither Storm sucked in, completely void of memory. Soren, bitter because of Magnus/Ellegaard's death and the reformation of the Wither Storms, leaves the group temporarily to think things over. The amnesiac Gabriel/Petra unwittingly reveals that the other Ocelots are nearby, and Jesse must choose to allow Lukas to go and find them, or force him to stay with them. Suddenly, Ivor appears and, after an argument with Soren, reveals that the Storms are following Jesse's amulet. He proposes a solution: at his laboratory, in the Far Lands, he owns an enchanted book containing the power of the Command Block itself. He explains that if it enchants a tool, said tool could destroy the Command Block. Axel takes Jesse's amulet so that the Storms don't follow him/her, and Jesse, Olivia, Soren, Ivor and Gabriel/Petra (the amnesiac), and potentially Lukas, leave for the Far Lands. Along the way, Ivor is separated from the rest. The group faces various puzzles in the way of the room containing the book, but once there, Jesse finds the End Crystals supposedly destroyed in the Order's battle with the Ender Dragon. Soren is forced to admit the truth: The Order used the Command Block to illegitimately complete most of their adventures, including their killing the Ender Dragon - they simply glitched it out of existence. They then took full credit for it, and swore never to speak the truth.
Ivor then reappears and reveals that he, after leaving the Order in disgust, planned to use the Wither Storm to show the world the truth about the Order. Jesse proceeds to construct the enchanted tool (be it a sword, pickaxe, axe, shovel or hoe) and may also accept new armor from Ivor. Once they return, all four members of the Order are separated from the group (some in fear, some to fight alone, and some out of worry for fellow members), and Jesse and his/her friends are forced to take care of the Storm. (If Lukas was allowed to leave and find the Ocelots, they help as well.) With the unwitting help of the multitudes of nearby Endermen (that escaped the End when Soren's lab went underwater), Jesse enters the Wither Storm and destroys the Command Block. Reuben surprises Jesse by joining him/her to assist. However, shortly before the final blow to the Command Block is dealt, Reuben falls a very long distance out of the Wither Storm onto the ground. The Storm, once again, falls apart. Jesse falls into water, and finds Reuben badly injured nearby. He/she sits next to Reuben as he passes away. Gabriel and Petra are both promptly void of their sickness and amnesia, whichever had which.
One week later, a celebration is held for the friends' victory, and the friends are dubbed the "New Order of the Stone." Jesse may also have Gabriel publicly admit the truth about the "old" Order. As the episode closes, the narrator hints that the friends' adventures are just beginning, for there are "many more worlds than just ours."


===== Order Up! (Episode 5) =====
Three months after the events of Episode Four, the New Order (Jesse, Axel, Olivia and Petra) goes, on a tip from Ivor, to an ancient jungle temple where they discover a mysterious enchanted Flint and Steel. Outside the temple, they're suddenly accosted by the "Blaze Rods," the reformed Ocelots, with Aiden in charge, having ditched Lukas and taken over his role. Aiden is severely bitter towards the fame the New Order has attained, and he demands that Jesse surrender the Flint and Steel to him. Jesse and friends manage to scare the Blaze Rods away, however. Back in town, Axel and Olivia are separated from Jesse and Petra, who show the Flint and Steel to Ivor. Ivor claims that, according to his research, the temple and the Flint and Steel are both products of a legendary, ancient group of master builders called the "Old Builders." Apparently, the enchanted Flint and Steel is the key to finding an all-powerful object known as the "Eversource," which gave the Old Builders an unlimited supply of building material. To find more clues, the trio, with Lukas, return to the temple. On a hidden second floor, they find a golden portal frame, which Jesse activates with the Flint and Steel. The Blaze Rods then appear and ambush them, taking the Flint and Steel and running through the portal. Jesse, Ivor, Petra and Lukas give chase.
Suddenly, Jesse and friends find themselves alone on a floating dirt island in the sky. They destroy it and use its dirt to build a bridge over to what appears to be an entire kingdom atop the clouds. They soon find out that Sky City (the kingdom) has a ban on all building and breaking of blocks unless approved by the leader, The Founder (Melissa Hutchison). Because of this, most inhabitants they meet are terrified of socializing with them, save for an innkeeper named Milo (Jim Meskimen). He reveals that the Blaze Rods left for the Eversource, which is in the palace. Unfortunately, it is revealed that Aiden has fooled The Founder into thinking that the Order have evil intentions, and Ivor and Lukas are captured (although Ivor is willing to be imprisoned, as he reasons that this will get him close to the Eversource). Petra escapes with Milo. Jesse may choose to turn himself/herself over as well, or escape with Milo and Petra. Milo turns out to be the leader of an underground rebellion called "Build Club," who secretly build against The Founder's wishes. Either way, Ivor and Lukas (and possibly Jesse) soon escape from the prison, and Petra and Milo (and possibly Jesse) infiltrate The Founder's palace. Inside, they regroup, with plans to find the Eversource. Milo wants to steal it for Build Club, and Ivor wants to take it home with him. They soon find the object of interest in a hidden room, but it turns out to be nothing more than a chicken that lays spawn eggs. Jesse may conspire to take it home, give it to Milo, or leave it alone.
Suddenly, the five are ambushed by Aiden and The Founder. The latter confronts them, adamant in believing they planned to steal it. Then Aiden reveals his true colors, and knocks The Founder, Jesse, and possibly Lukas over the edge. To everyone's surprise, they find themselves on an all-new, untouched overworld below Sky City - The Founder was convinced that nothing but an abyss lay below them. She and Jesse build a dirt tower back to Sky City, only to find it slowly being destroyed by monsters the Blaze Rods are furiously summoning via spawn eggs. (Lukas, if he was sent over, sits this out to recuperate from his fight with Aiden.) Jesse gets into the palace and confronts Aiden, corners him at the edge, and retrieves the Flint and Steel. He/she may elect to send Aiden over the edge, bring him to safety with them, or simply leave him there (which results in his falling over anyway). The group decides that Sky City is hopeless, and everyone uses a waterfall to float to the ground below. When the Sky City inhabitants realize that they must start a new civilization, Jesse must choose whether to leave The Founder (named Isa) in charge (who will simply reinstate the government Sky City was run by), Milo in charge (who supports anarchy and total freedom), or have them share power (with a republic-based government being formed). Jesse then reveals that he/she and Isa discovered a portal frame underground while they were building the dirt tower, and he/she lights it. Jesse, Ivor, Petra and Lukas go through - only to find themselves in an extremely long, dark, portal-filled corridor.


===== A Portal to Mystery (Episode 6) =====
Upon entering one of the portals, Jesse, Ivor, Petra and Lukas find themselves in a swamp in a world similar to their own, with two major incongruities - there are two moons, and they are greeted by a very massive horde of zombies. They find a mysterious invitation on the ground close to where they appeared, which invites them to a nearby mansion "for an evening of fun and festivity with your fellow adventurers." Inside the mansion, they find seven other people who were invited as well. Five of them are well-known Minecraft YouTubers Jordan Maron, Joseph Garrett, Daniel Middleton, Elizabeth "Lizzie" Dwyer and Stacy Hinojosa. The other two are fictional characters, TorqueDawg and Cassie Rose. The seven are just as oblivious to the mansion as the Order. When the four get inside, they meet Jordan and TorqueDawg, but after a few minutes' discussion, suddenly the lights go out in the room. TorqueDawg is found dead, shot to death with poison-tipped arrows from a dispenser above.
With this shocking news, the remaining six other guests begin to act very suspicious and secretive. All ten characters agree that they are in grave danger - with no escape, due to the horde of zombies outside. Jesse questions the YouTubers, none of which have any insight. Then, Jordan has a hunch, but as he begins to explain that the murderer is trying to obtain an enchanted Flint and Steel, such as the one Jesse has, he suddenly falls into a trap and dies. Accompanying the trap is a presentation prepared by the murderer, who introduces himself/herself as "The White Pumpkin," and confirms that he/she is after the Flint and Steel. Jesse searches for clues that may reveal The White Pumpkin's identity and, due to his/her finding a button on the table that the group sat at, concludes that one of the five remaining guests is the murderer.
A series of investigations and clue-hunting lead Jesse to a secret passageway integrated throughout the mansion, from which the White Pumpkin watches the group, activating traps. A near-apprehension of the murderer, the death of either Lizzie or Daniel, and a few other clues lead most of the YouTubers to believe Lukas is the murderer. Jesse, Petra and Joseph (who had an enchanted Flint and Steel as well) disprove the claim by finding the White Pumpkin's base of operations, which has clues that reveal the White Pumpkin to be Cassie Rose. Upon breaking the news to the other YouTubers, and forcing Cassie to admit the truth, she accidentally sets off one of her own traps and is killed. At dawn, Jesse, Ivor, Petra, Lukas, Joseph, Stacy and Daniel/Lizzie exit the mansion and go their separate ways. The Order approaches what appears to be an unlit portal frame, but upon lighting it they suddenly fall into a deep, dark chamber below.
As it turns out, Cassie faked her death, and created a final trap to get Jesse to surrender his/her enchanted Flint and Steel. She had been trapped in this world for years, and intended to finally escape with the Flint and Steel she hoped to obtain from the invitees. Jesse and friends manage to outsmart her, and leave her stuck on a floating platform above a pit of endermites. The group then lights the real portal, which was in an underground room nearby, and go inside.


===== Access Denied (Episode 7) =====
Jesse, Ivor, Petra and Lukas are found frantically running between portals in the hall, trying to find their way home. Eventually, this exhausts and angers Petra. She finds a redstone-themed portal frame and concludes that "redstone means smart people. Hopefully smart enough to help us find the way home." The others cannot convince her otherwise, and all four go inside.
The group finds themselves in a desert mesa world. They are confused as they meet very resilient, tough and fast people and mobs that appear to be mind-controlled via redstone. The four are captured by some of these people, and are taken to meet the thing responsible: PAMA - Prototype Autonomous Management Agent (Jason "jtop" Nipolski) - an artificially intelligent computer that controls everything in this world. It claims that it is making everything efficient and "useful," with no wasted energy or thought. It begins to question Jesse and friends, knowing that they are foreigners. It desires to escape this world and make more things "useful." When it doesn't get the info it seeks, it makes Petra and Lukas "useful," which allows PAMA to see everything a person knows. Jesse and Ivor manage to escape. They meet a not mind-controlled woman named Harper (Yvette Nicole Brown), who turns out to be PAMA's creator. Apparently, she intended it to simply make use of mobs to help out with farming and mining, until the day PAMA decided to do the same to the people themselves. As it turns out, Harper is an Old Builder, who built the Portal Hall and can help Jesse and friends get home. She reveals that, however, she destroyed the exit portal from this world, so that PAMA could not get out, but she knows how to rebuild it. She brings them to the entrance to her secret lab, which has something that will help them defeat PAMA and save everyone. Lukas, Petra and some monsters then find them and attack. Jesse may save Lukas or Petra by pushing them into water, but the other captures Harper and brings her to PAMA. As Harper is carried off, she gives Jesse vague clues to a puzzle in her lab, telling him/her to "use the [VR] headset."
Jesse, Ivor and Lukas/Petra enter Harper's lab and, after solving Harper's puzzle, find the headset specified. Jesse wears it; it allows him/her to take control over and migrate into PAMA-controlled mobs, all while in the laboratory. Controlling a zombie, Jesse frees Harper before she is made "useful," and Harper shows him/her where PAMA's processors and power source, the Redstone Heart, are kept. She is then re-captured, and apparently made "useful," as PAMA disables the headset. PAMA begins to create an exit portal. Ivor and Lukas/Petra help Jesse to get inside PAMA, with plans to destroy the processors with water. He/she accomplishes this, and after a fight with Harper and Petra/Lukas (Jesse's remaining "useful" friend), Jesse rips out PAMA's Redstone Heart.
With Harper and Petra/Lukas freed and PAMA destroyed, the five head into the center of the town that PAMA took over, and meet the now free townspeople, who are very angry with Harper. Jesse may support Harper and encourage them to forgive her, or not. They then finish the exit portal, and Harper shows Jesse a very long, hidden stairway that will lead them to the other Old Builders. They possess an item called the Portal Atlas, which will show Jesse and friends the way home.


===== A Journey's End? (Episode 8) =====
Harper leads Jesse, Ivor, Petra and Lukas into the Old Builders' world via the stairs uncovered in Episode Seven. When they arrive at a door, Harper suddenly warns them "don't die!" and pushes them into a very violent game of Spleef. They struggle to keep from getting killed, and when Ivor and Petra are in trouble, Jesse must choose which to save. Lukas tries to save the other, but he and Ivor/Petra fall out of the match and are "eliminated" (killed by fast-moving pistons). Jesse goes on a rage and begins to attack competitors, but this is against the rules and the match is stopped. Judging and overseeing the match are three Old Builders, Hadrian (Jim Cummings), Mevia (Kari Wahlgren) and Otto (Jamie Alcroft), who are upset with Jesse and question him/her. They explain that Lukas and Ivor/Petra are not dead, but have respawned nearby and have to work in Nether Quartz mines until they are called to play in the Games again. Jesse and Hadrian make a deal: If Jesse can win the Games (three total), the Old Builders will let him/her keep the Portal Atlas and take all his/her friends home. (If they lose, Harper must work in the mines too.) Harper appears and takes Jesse and Petra/Ivor to the village where competitors stay, and explains that people are forced to play in the Games until they win. This is nearly impossible, as the Games are rigged - they are designed not for sport, but to entertain the Old Builders, and no one wins unless they so desire. Harper leaves to talk to Otto, as he is known for his loyalty to fairness and rules, and may help Jesse.
Jesse gets Lukas and Ivor/Petra out of the mines (technically, eliminated competitors are not to go to the mines until their entire team is eliminated). Otto appears and expresses support for Jesse, saying he will make sure that if Jesse wins, he/she will get the Atlas - Hadrian and Mevia usually change deals and rules around on people. Jesse completes the second competition - a race - but Petra/Ivor is killed. After the race, Jesse is called into Hadrian's office to further discuss the terms of their deal. Hadrian has used the Atlas to read about Jesse's background as a multi-world hero and, unfortunately, locked up Olivia, Axel, and an usher from EnderCon (Episode One) (whose name is Reuben, which confused Hadrian) in his office as an incentive for Jesse to accept another deal. Jesse will throw the match and lose the Games, and Lukas, Ivor, Petra, Axel, Olivia, Harper and "Reuben" can go home while Jesse stays in the mines. Jesse may accept or deny this deal.
Returning to the village, Jesse convinces the other teams to cooperate and rebel against Hadrian and Mevia by all winning at the same time. This works, and Otto begins to grant Jesse the Atlas, satisfying the original deal. Hadrian and Mevia then throw a tantrum and trap him and most players in obsidian. Jesse and the Old Builders fight; Jesse is killed, but when he/she respawns, Harper (who freed Axel and Olivia), Axel, Olivia, Ivor, Petra, Lukas and Emily (Audrey Wasilewski) (one of Jesse's competitors and newfound friends) appear with weapons, tools, and the armor of "Tim" (a made-up character by Hadrian in order to inspire the others to continue playing). Jesse returns to the arena and "eliminates" Hadrian and Mevia. Otto gives Jesse the Atlas, and everyone returns to the Portal Hall. Harper and Emily, by respective suggestions from Jesse, may each return to their own homes, seek a home elsewhere (Harper) or keep playing the Games (Emily), or join the Order in their homeworld. Otto expresses his plans to make the Games fun again. Those finally leaving go through the Portal that drops them off in Jesse and friends' homeworld. Jesse shows their new treasures to Axel and Olivia. After a moment's discussion, they suddenly find that the Atlas and the Enchanted Flint and Steel are missing, and that Ivor has left. Jesse and friends may follow him, or stay and wait for him to return.
The very first choice the player made in Episode One decides whether Hadrian and Mevia find themselves in a land of zombie-sized chickens, or chicken-sized zombies in a post-credits scene.


==== Season 2 (2017) ====


===== Hero in Residence (Episode 1) =====
One year has passed since the last season ended. Lukas narrates a novel on Season One as per the Order's various adventures. As he finishes, Jesse, Axel and Olivia (Natasha Loring) provide feedback for the novel. Jesse's new intern, Radar (Yuri Lowenthal), appears, notifying Jesse and his/her friends of an upcoming adventure with Petra, and Jesse's Founding Day preparations (an annual celebration of Beacontown's founding). However, Axel and Olivia have to prepare for Founding Day in their respective cities (Boom Town and Redstonia), and Lukas desires to work on his novel. They part ways, and Jesse and Radar venture into Beacontown, helping citizens prepare. Afterwards, Jesse heads to the mines to meet Petra, who wants Jesse's help to capture a "mystery creature" running through the cave system.
The two race to apprehend the mystery creature, which turns out to be a llama. After successfully obtaining it, they stumble onto a large underground chamber, with a sand pyramid in the middle; perched atop is a prismarine glove/gauntlet. Jesse investigates it, and it suddenly clamps onto Jesse's hand. He/she cannot get it off, and it occasionally whispers Jesse's name. The sand pyramid suddenly falls apart, revealing a bottomless pit (which Petra dubs a "heckmouth") underneath. Jesse and Petra cover it up with dirt, and the three make their way back to the surface. Petra reveals that Stella (Ashley Albert), the leader of a nearby city called Champion City, "borrowed" Petra's valuable golden sword. Stella forces Petra to go on quests, such as finding her runaway llama (named Lluna), before it will be returned. They head to Champion City to take Lluna to Stella, who considers Jesse to be her lifelong rival (although they had never met before). After Petra returns Lluna and demands the sword back, Stella reveals it all to be a scam and refuses to return the sword. She heads into her treasure room. Jesse and Petra secretly follow her, and after threatening her, she surrenders the sword.
Petra and Jesse begin to walk back to Beacontown, when they suddenly see the "heckmouth" blow through the ground and spit out charged creepers. The two cover it up again, and continue running for town, where Petra knows of a legendary treasure hunter and adventurer named Jack (Fred Tatasciore); she thinks he can help Jesse with the "heckmouth" and the gauntlet. When they arrive, he is visibly shocked to see the gauntlet, and admits that he found one once; upon his (and two friends of his) following it to a very dangerous Ocean Monument, both of his friends were killed. He at first refuses to take them, as he is the only one who knows where it is, but Jesse convinces him. Jack tells them that an ancient magic block, called the "Structure Block," is hidden in the monument, and is the key to closing the pit. (This is a real block in Minecraft, used by level creators to load buildings instantly.) Jesse, Petra, Jack and Nurm (Mark Barbolak) (Jack's cartographer villager friend) leave for the Monument.
As they travel, Jack informs them of how the ocean monument was supposedly created by "The Admin," a being of infinite power that allegedly created the world. (Although most people think this is the cause for many illogical occurrences in the Monument, Jack does not believe it.) (This is a reference to how most Minecraft servers are created and controlled by an "Administrator," who can do anything he/she desires to the server.) They put on water helmets, and swim to the monument. Inside, the four complete various puzzles and impossible tasks, one of which suddenly frees an old adventurer named Vos (JB Blanc) from an obsidian prison. Vos was one of Jack's two friends who were thought to be killed in the monument when they were last there. Upon reaching the center of the monument, they find two Structure Blocks. When Jesse picks one, The Admin, in the form of a giant prismarine statue, abruptly appears and tries to kill Jesse. Jesse and friends narrowly escape, and get back to Beacontown just in time for Founding Day. They use the Block to close the pit, and briefly celebrate their victory in the middle of the town. Suddenly, the giant prismarine statue reappears, ridiculing Jesse's attempts to get away from him.
A post-credits scene shows Lukas at his house working on his novel, but when he sees The Admin approaching Beacontown, he suits up and rides off to help Jesse.


===== Giant Consequences (Episode 2) =====
The Admin meets Jesse at Beacontown, and forces him/her to fight him (using a giant clock to turn day into night, inviting monsters as well). Jesse attempts to use the Structure Block to help, but when he/she drops it, The Admin swallows it. Sometime later, The Admin grabs Jesse and prepares to swallow him/her, but suddenly Lukas distracts him (with an arrow to the face), causing him to drop Jesse. He/she then notices a weak point on the back of the statue's head, and climbs up to it. When he/she punches it, The Admin falls over and "dies," dropping the giant clock. Jesse uses it to bring the sun back up.
The townspeople begin rebuilding the damaged buildings. The clock is too big to move from the center of town, so Jesse tells either Lukas or Radar to watch it for now, while the other helps with repairs. Some time later, Jack, Vos and Petra accidentally reveal that they are soon going on an adventure without Jesse. Suddenly, snowflakes begin falling in Beacontown; the town is not in a biome capable of snow, so Jesse suspects The Admin; immediately, The Admin reappears in the form of a snowman. He makes the clock disappear, turns the time to night again, and gives Jesse a challenge: Beacontown will remain dark, snowy and surrounded by hostile mobs until Jesse reclaims the giant clock, which The Admin says is atop his "awesome, fantastic, super-deadly icy palace of despair" nearby. The Admin wants Jesse to become his partner and friend if he/she succeeds. Jesse, Petra, Lukas, Radar, Jack and Vos head toward the ice palace. On the way, the group encounters Lluna and Stella, with Stella annoyed about the snow. Upon finding her "rival" can do nothing about it until they get to the palace, she and Lluna decide to tag along to "keep an eye" on them.
The Admin presents several challenges in the way of the clock. With Vos failing to make it (falling into a water pit below) and Radar/Jack doing sub-par, the Admin insists that Jesse go it alone and dump his/her lacking friends - "the losers are supposed to lose!" He puts Radar/Jack into a difficult vertical maze, and claims that if he can make it out alive, without Jesse, he would be set free. Radar falls into the water, and Jack falls to the ground, even when Jesse helps them. The group then mines through a wall to the room opposite it (cheating). They use Shulkers to levitate up to the clock from this room; this is also where they find Radar (and Stella, who also failed) trapped in ice. Jesse melts Radar's ice, and may choose whether to save Stella as well. Jesse also chooses whether Petra or Jack should get the clock in the meantime. She/he makes it up to the clock and destroys it, turning the world back to normal time.
The group prepares to get out, but Jack insists on finding Vos. Lukas, Radar and Lluna leave. Suddenly, they see Vos nearby, who ridicules Jesse and quotes The Admin. Jack begins to question him. Vos then transforms himself, revealing The Admin's true, human, form (JB Blanc). The real Vos was, in fact, killed on Jack's first visit to the Ocean Monument; The Admin posed as him. He is angry with Jesse for insisting on helping his/her friends and not personally getting the clock (and also for cheating). Stella then convinces the Admin to let her work with him, as while she lost, she "has a terrific attitude." The Admin teleports Petra/Jack away as his new partner, as technically he/she was the winner, and sends Jesse and Jack/Petra "to a place where [they would] never see the light of day, ever again."
In a post-credits scene, an anonymous man introduces Jesse to what appears to be an underground prison, and a brief shot of a maniacally laughing female prisoner is seen.


===== Jailhouse Block (Episode 3) =====
Jesse finds himself/herself at the aforementioned prison - the "Sunshine Institute" - where The Admin sends people he detests (and their friends). Directly after meeting the warden (Donovan Patton) (a man named Warden), he/she makes an escape attempt with Jack/Petra (who was sent as well). However, since the institute is surrounded by an obsidian maze with dangerous mobs, they are quickly apprehended and sent back to the institute. Jesse is taken to Warden's office, where he/she learns about the institute. Radar and Nurm have been made prisoners as well to help make sure that Jesse and Jack/Petra behave. Warden used to be a prisoner, and wants Jesse to follow in his footsteps. He proceeds to torture Radar in order to coerce Jesse into becoming an "associate" (guard). Jesse may accept or deny this offer, with no real consequence except that he/she either continues to be a "guest" (prisoner) or becomes an associate. Either way, he/she accompanies Radar to the "Mush Room," where guests are forced to make mushroom stew, from very rare mushrooms, to survive.
Radar is very tired and hungry on their arrival at the Mush Room. As an associate, Jesse, with the help of another associate (YouTuber bigbst4tz2), makes Radar a cookie; as a guest, Jesse fights other guests to make him mushroom stew. Suddenly, an alarm is heard, announcing the (eventually failed) escape attempt of "Prisoner X" (April Stewart), a famed escape artist who apparently knows her way through the obsidian maze. Jesse and friends resolve to find her and enlist her help.
As an associate, Jesse wants to get promoted and be entrusted to guard the lower levels, where X's cell is; as a guest, he/she wants to cause trouble and be sent down to said cell area. He/she investigates another guest's cell, and finds a mooshroom that gave this guest unlimited mushroom stew. Once the Warden finds out, he asks Jesse to shear the mushrooms from the mooshroom, changing it back to a regular cow. He promises Jesse to be an associate of the lower area, the "Zombie Mines," if he/she obeys. If he/she shears the cow, Jesse will be promoted to an associate in the Zombie Mines; if not, he/she, as a guest, is sent down to the same lower levels. Jesse's friends come with him/her.
X's cell is just beyond a barred door located in the Zombie Mines. Jesse gets a lever from Stella, who is an associate in the Mines, to open X's cell, and can convince Stella to escape with him/her or not. As soon as the cell is opened, The Admin appears, firing Warden for not keeping Jesse in line. He then forces Jesse and Petra/Jack (whoever "was technically the winner" in Episode Two) to fight to the death, but they instead cooperate to try and attack the Admin. Annoyed by this he abandons the Sunshine Institute, but not before announcing his plan to impersonate Jesse and earn the trust of the inhabitants of Beacontown. He takes Stella and leaves.
The group, now with Petra/Jack, proceed to Prisoner X's isolated cell. Along the way, Jesse, Nurma and Lluna are separated from the rest. Jesse convinces X, whose real name is Xara, to help them out. (Xara was seen briefly in Episode Two's epilogue.) Unfortunately, Jesse is forced to leave Nurm or Lluna in her place; unless at least one pressure plate in her cell is stood upon, TNT is activated. The group meets up again, takes weapons, and proceeds to the maze. They find and confront Warden in front of the maze, where he says that he vowed to never let Xara free. (She used to be an Admin herself, and was stripped of her powers when she "tried to destroy [the current Admin].") Xara then kills him, and explains that she is "not the villain here." They start to run through the maze, defeating monsters. Xara continues to reveal that she and a third Admin, named Fred, fought the current Admin - named Romeo - for control of the world. Fred was killed and Xara was stripped of her powers, and imprisoned in Romeo's Institute.
At the center of the maze, the fleeing group finds a tall diamond tower. Xara explains that there is a passageway beneath the tower and that they need to dig into the bedrock to escape (the prison is at the bottom of the world). She also explains that the secret to ridding Romeo of his abilities, discovered by Fred, lies there as well. Upon walking down the dimly lit stairs, Jesse can see a giant Enderman approaching them.
In a post-credits scene, Romeo, in Jesse's form, gives the Order of the Stone's Amulet to an armored assailant, ordering him to hunt down Jesse and his/her friends (having told the assailant that they are the fakes).


===== Below the Bedrock (Episode 4) =====
Xara brings the group to the "Underneath," the original overworld created by Romeo, Fred and Xara. She explains that after Romeo killed Fred and imprisoned her, he covered it with bedrock and created the overworld Jesse and friends came from. Upon reaching "The Oasis," Xara's ruined home city, she is overwhelmed with grief and anger for Romeo's betrayal, murdering of Fred, and destruction of their former home. Jesse promises to bring justice upon Romeo. Xara shows them a broken portal frame, which she says allowed the three to visit each other; an object from the second overworld, or closely related to Romeo, would make the portal send them to the surface. Jesse asks her to rebuild the portal, and she tells them to head to "Fred's Keep," where Fred supposedly kept the object that could remove Romeo's powers. While riding a minecart track to the Keep, the giant Enderman separates everyone; Jesse and Jack find themselves stuck dangling on the side of a cliff. Wild scavengers find them and offer to help if the two give them their weapons. If Jesse agrees, the two are lifted to safety; if Jesse refuses, he/she eventually pulls himself/herself up, but Jack falls, supposedly, to his death.
The friends regroup and continue their journey. They find the Keep to be inhabited by a society of people, the "Friends of Fred," who revere Fred as their former protector and leader, because he built a village for them to live in peace. Jesse, with some difficulty, enters Fred's house, and discovers that the object is found in the cabin that Fred, Xara and Romeo lived in. The leader of the Friends, Binta (Kimberly Brooks), gives them a compass that Fred claimed would always point towards his home, in exchange for Jesse agreeing to help the society to escape to above the bedrock. If either is present, Jack and/or Nurm stay behind, for various reasons; the remaining group begins to follow the compass.
Jesse, Petra and Radar (and possibly Lluna) are suddenly stopped by the armored assailant seen in the epilogue of Episode Three. After a brief battle, Jesse convinces the assailant that he/she is the real Jesse; the assailant takes off his mask to reveal that he is none other than Ivor. He explains what Romeo has done in Jesse's form, convincing everyone that "Jesse" simply obtained the special powers of this Admin that he/she defeated. Ivor gives Jesse the Order's Amulet to power Xara's portal, and leaves to report back to Romeo.
The trio (quartet) find that the Admins' cabin is located in "Romeoburg" (the Admins each had their own cities - The Oasis, Fred's Keep and Romeoburg). They also find that, for some reason, Romeo had hid the cabin behind a game for him and his two friends to play. Jesse, Petra and Radar (leaving Lluna outside) complete this game and enter their cabin. There they learn that later on in their friendship, Romeo became obsessed with keeping the trio together, and that this created tension that resulted in his betrayal. They find a journal left by Fred (who apparently anticipated his murder) for Xara, containing a keyword - #POTATO451 - and a set of instructions on how to defeat Romeo. Petra becomes emotional, realizing how similar her position is to Romeo's, and worries that the new Order's friendship will end in a similar way. She confesses to Jesse that she is conflicted; while she does not desire to stay in Beacontown, she resents the idea of being separated from Jesse. Jesse may promise to follow Petra wherever she goes, or to stay put and always be there for her (or he/she may remain silent).
The friends return to The Oasis and find that Xara has fixed the portal. Jesse signals everyone at Fred's Keep, with fireworks, that his/her part of the deal is fulfilled and everyone can leave now.  He/she gives Xara the journal, and she swears vengeance on Romeo. Jesse may also return Xara's long-lost bed, found at the cabin, which allows her to see that "there are good things left, if you look for them." Everyone at Fred's Keep reappears (Jack and possibly Nurm rejoin as well). Unfortunately, the fireworks also attract the giant Enderman, which causes chaos. Realizing that the Enderman is targeting him, Radar offers to use himself as bait to save Fred's people, letting them through the portal. Jesse must choose to either leave Radar behind, bringing the Friends of Fred, or to abandon the Friends and force Radar to come along. Jesse activates the portal with the Order's Amulet. If Xara's bed was returned, she stays behind; if not, she joins those going through the portal. The group find themselves outside the Old Order of the Stone's temple. Atop the temple, they can see a very different-looking Beacontown in the distance.
In a post-credits scene, Lukas, having gotten back from the Ice Palace, appears in the Order Hall and greets "Jesse," asking where everyone is. Romeo's eyes glow red and the scene ends.


===== Above and Beyond (Episode 5) =====
Jesse, Petra, Jack, Radar/Binta, Nurm/Lluna, and possibly Xara enter Beacontown in secret via the mines. Once there, they find that Beacontown has changed immensely since Jesse left, with Romeo (as Jesse) having set up a dictatorship based in a giant, floating tower above town. The group decides that this tower contains the "Primary Terminal" mentioned in Fred's diary. While approaching it, they suddenly find "Jesse," Stella, and Axel and Olivia wandering the streets, discussing "Jesse's" self-centered upcoming convention, JesseCon. If Xara is with the real Jesse, still convinced that violence is the only way to defeat Romeo, she lashes out and attacks him, but is immediately strangled to death. Otherwise, Olivia and Axel express their desire to exit Beacontown, but Romeo threatens them, and destroys Champion City as an example.
Horrified at these events, the real Jesse's group grabs Axel and Olivia. Jesse tells them of their journey so far, once the seven arrive at Jack's shop - now vandalized and looted. The group searches the building for useful items left behind, and Jesse comes across a hidden-away pair of elytra wings. Suddenly, the group is surprised by the return of Lluna/Nurm and Ivor, the latter having freed the former from the Sunshine Institute. Jesse then forms a plan to sneak himself/herself, Jack, and Petra up to the tower, making use of the elytra wings to fly up to it.
Jesse's plan is successful, but while approaching the top of the tower, the three friends are confronted by the new "Ocelots," consisting of Lukas and a large host of Romeo's prisoners in Beacontown. Jesse has to convince them that he/she is the genuine Jesse, and upon doing so, the Ocelots agree to accompany him/her to the top to rid Romeo of his powers. Upon arriving, the group is confronted by "Jesse." The real Jesse can choose to attack him or attempt to talk to him. Regardless of this decision, Romeo admits that running Beacontown is unpleasant, and asks Jesse to take back over. He then thanks Jesse for teaching him a lesson about friendship, "that [he will] totally remember for next time." Having concluded that this world is no longer worth his while, he begins to add a layer of bedrock over it, similar to that of the Underneath, with plans to build a new world on top of it. Jesse, Jack and Petra make their way to a portal atop the tower that leads them to a realm known as "Terminal Space," where Romeo tests new plans and builds.
In Terminal Space the three find a puzzle that verbally requests a "password." Upon Jesse entering a poisoned potato ("#POTATO") and causing a display to read "451," the three are shown a holographic recording of Fred (Fred Tatasciore), addressed to Xara. Fred shows off a Golden Gauntlet that, upon punching Romeo, would remove his powers. Suddenly, Romeo appears. Jesse punches him with the Gauntlet, and Romeo immediately discovers that some of his abilities are gone.
Romeo fights Jesse in the form of a variety of entities and arenas encountered on the latter's journey, including "Vos," the snowman, and Petra/Jack (whoever Jesse sent after the clock in Episode Two). After several punches, Jesse removes Romeo's powers completely. Terminal Space, held together by Romeo's powers, begins to crumble, and Jesse can choose to leave Romeo behind as he/she escapes, or take pity on him and bring him home with them. While Terminal Space falls apart, a giant prismarine statue glitches out and begins attacking indiscriminately. If Xara and Radar were left in the Underneath, the latter suddenly appears, still being chased by the giant Enderman. The Enderman destroys the statue, allowing everyone to escape. Otherwise, Romeo distracts the statue and sacrifices himself so that the three friends can escape. Jesse, Petra, Jack, and possibly Romeo and/or Radar exit Terminal Space just in time. If Romeo is still alive, he thanks Jesse for helping him escape, even though he deserved to die for his wrongdoings. If Xara is still alive, Romeo resolves to return to the Underneath, try to heal the rift between him and Xara, and help all the people he made life difficult for.
While Beacontown is being rebuilt, Ivor states his plans to reconnect with the old Order of the Stone. Lukas, Radar, Jack and Nurm help Beacontown rebuild. Depending on Jesse's relationship with Stella and Lluna, Stella asks him/her to take care of Lluna in Beacontown while Champion City is being rebuilt, Lluna chooses to stay with Jesse against Stella's wishes, or both haughtily leave Beacontown. Axel and Olivia return to their respective communities, and Petra decides to adventure for a while.
Petra mildly encourages Jesse to come with her, especially if he/she promised to go with her forever in Episode Four. The player may choose to leave with Petra or stay in Beacontown. If the player decides to leave with Petra, Jesse leaves Radar, or a voted-in new leader. If Lluna stayed with Jesse, she will also accompany Jesse & Petra on their new adventure. If the player stays in Beacontown, as he/she approaches the Order Hall, Radar will tell Jesse that he/she is way behind on his/her mail correspondence. Two letters that Radar mention are from Aiden (absent since Season One, Episode Five), wanting to redeem himself, and someone under the initials "WP," stating "Look out".


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (2015–16) ===
The main Minecraft: Story Mode game was separated into five episodes for Season 1, released in one month intervals. Three additional episodes were later released.


=== Season 2 (2017) ===
In July 2017, the first trailer was released for season 2 revealing a release date of July 11.


== Development and releases ==
The idea for Minecraft: Story Mode came around the end of 2012 when Telltale Games was engaged in work for Tales from the Borderlands, an episodic series based on the Borderlands series. The idea of developing stories around other established video game franchises led the team to brainstorm the idea for a Minecraft-related game, given that the game was essentially a "blank canvas" for storytelling, according to Job Stauffer, and would create an interesting challenge. The two groups recognized the amount of fan-generated narrative content that existed in the way of YouTube videos and other media forms that demonstrated the potential for storytelling in the game. Many on Telltale's staff were also already fans of Minecraft, with a private server that they played on, with some of the incidents that occurred on there becoming ideas for the game's story. Telltale began negotiations with Mojang in early 2013, and began work on the title shortly thereafter. Stauffer noted that Microsoft's acquisition of Mojang was not a factor in the game's development, as their interaction with Mojang began well before Microsoft's negotiations.Telltale opted to create a new main character of Jesse for Minecraft: Story Mode instead of using default "Steve" character from Minecraft, feeling that they did not want to attempt to rewrite how players already saw this character in the game. Other primary characters in the game are loosely designed around archetypes of common player-characters for Minecraft, such that those that engage in building, fighting, or griefing other players. The game will not attempt to provide any background for some concepts in Minecraft, such as the creepers, as to avoid the various interpretations that fans have done for these elements, though they are elements of the game's story.Stauffer stated that the game's story would be aimed as family-friendly, similar to the films The Goonies or Ghostbusters; their intended content would be equivalent to a PG-13 or PEGI-12 rating. A number of the voice actors are alumni of such films of the 1980s such as Corey Feldman who starred in The Goonies, and the game includes various references to these types of films. Stauffer reflected that while Telltale's more recent games like The Walking Dead were more mature stories, their original adventure games like Sam & Max and Strong Bad's Cool Game for Attractive People were written as family-friendly, and that they consider their approach to Minecraft: Story Mode as "part of our DNA". The story was aimed to be accessible to both existing players of Minecraft – both novice and advanced players – and to new audiences outside of the game.Minecraft: Story Mode was formally announced in December 2014 as a collaboration project between Mojang and Telltale; the announcement was presented as an interactive adventure game named "Info Quest II". Its first trailer was released during the MINECON 2015 convention in early July. The game was planned for a five-episode series for release on Android, iOS, Microsoft Windows, OS X, PlayStation and Xbox consoles in late 2015; Telltale also released the game for the Wii U, only a month after the original Minecraft first came to a Nintendo platform. It was also the first time a Telltale title had been released on a Nintendo platform since Back to the Future: The Game. In addition, Minecraft: Story Mode – The Complete Adventure, incorporating both the main episodes and downloadable content, was announced for the Nintendo Switch.The series released for most systems on October 13, 2015, with the PlayStation Vita and Wii U versions to follow at a later date. A season pass of the game was available for purchase on October 27, 2015, which allows the player to access the other four episodes once they are released. Retail versions of the game were released on October 27, 2015.Netflix and Telltale signed a partnership in June 2018 for Netflix to offer Telltale's games over the service starting later that year, with Minecraft: Story Mode as the first planned title for the service. Amid troubles related to the bankruptcy of Telltale Games in October and November 2018, sufficient staff remained with Telltale to complete work on this version, which was released onto Netflix on November 27 and December 5, 2018.


=== Sequel ===
The first episode of Minecraft: Story Mode – Season Two was released on July 11, 2017 for Windows, macOS, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, iOS and Android. It continued the story from the first season, with the player's choices affecting elements within Season 2. Patton Oswalt, Catherine Taber, Ashley Johnson, and Scott Porter were confirmed to continue voicework for the new season. The game supports the new Crowd Play feature that Telltale introduced in Batman: The Telltale Series, allowing up to 2,000 audience members to vote on decisions for the player using Twitch or other streaming services.On August 3, 2017, Telltale announced that second episode, "Giant Consequences", would be released on August 15. The rest of the episodes were released on September 19, November 7, and December 19, 2017.


=== Closure of Telltale Games ===
In November 2018, Telltale Games began the process of closing down the studio due to financial issues. Most of its games started to become delisted from digital storefronts, including Minecraft: Story Mode. According to GOG.com, they had to pull the title due to "expiring licensing rights". The Minecraft team stated that even for those that had purchased the titles before their delisting, the episodes would no longer be downloadable after June 2019. Because the Xbox Live Marketplace does not allow for removing games from sale while at the same time allowing existing owners to download the game, each episode of the game's Xbox 360 version was repriced to $100 in the few weeks ahead of the delisting to deter users from purchasing them.


== Reception ==
Minecraft: Story Mode received "mixed or average reviews" from critics, with the Nintendo Switch version earning a weighted average of 67 based on 5 critics.


=== Season 1 (2015–16) ===


==== Episode 1: The Order of the Stone ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 71/100 based on 25 reviews, the PlayStation 4 version 71/100 based on 23 reviews and the Xbox One version 77/100 based on 13 reviews. On GameRankings, a score of 78.59% was given based on 11 reviews for the Xbox One version, 77.50% for Wii U based on 4 reviews, 73.53% for the PC version based on 16 reviews, and 73.29% for PlayStation 4 based on 21 reviews.


==== Episode 2: Assembly Required ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 59/100 based on 13 reviews, the PlayStation 4 version 53/100 based on 7 reviews and the Xbox One version 61/100 based on 8 reviews.


==== Episode 3: The Last Place You Look ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 73/100 based on 10 reviews, the PlayStation 4 version 73/100 based on 7 reviews and the Xbox One version 75/100 based on 9 reviews.


==== Episode 4: A Block and a Hard Place ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 68/100 based on 8 reviews, the PlayStation 4 version 72/100 based on 8 reviews and the Xbox One version 71/100 based on 8 reviews.


==== Episode 5: "Order Up!" ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 70/100 based on 6 reviews, the PlayStation 4 version 72/100 based on 9 reviews and the Xbox One version 69/100 based on 6 reviews.


==== Episode 6: A Portal to Mystery ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 64/100 based on 5 reviews, the PlayStation 4 version 69/100 based on 6 reviews and the Xbox One version 71/100 based on 5 reviews.


==== Episode 7: Access Denied ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the Microsoft Windows version 69/100 based on 4 reviews, the PlayStation 4 version 68/100 based on 6 reviews and the Xbox One version 71/100 based on 5 reviews.


==== Episode 8: A Journey's End? ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PlayStation 4 version 69/100 based on 6 reviews.


=== Season 2 (2017) ===


==== Episode 1: Hero in Residence ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version 71/100 based on 8 reviews,
the PlayStation 4 version 67/100 based on 8 reviews,
and the Xbox One version 76/100 based on 4 reviews.


==== Episode 2: Giant Consequences ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version 74/100 based on 8 critics and the PlayStation 4 version a score of 73/100 based on 4 reviews. On GameRankings, the PlayStation 4 version has a rating of 65.00% based on 2 reviews and on the PC version, it has a score of 72.86% based on 7 reviews.


==== Episode 3: Jailhouse Block ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version 71/100, based on 8 reviews, and the PlayStation 4 63/100 based on 4 reviews.


==== Episode 4: Below The Bedrock ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version a score of 74/100 based on 5 critics.


==== Episode 5: Above And Beyond ====
Aggregating review website Metacritic gave the PC version a score of 78/100 based on 4 critics.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Official website for season 2