Title: Xavier College Preparatory (Arizona)
Aspects: {'XCP'}

Xavier College Preparatory is a Catholic, all-female private high school in Phoenix, Arizona, United States. It is located in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Phoenix, drawing students from 120 local schools.


== History ==
Xavier High School was founded in 1943 by the Jesuit Fathers of St. Francis Xavier Parish and the Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Originally located on the campus of Brophy College Preparatory, the school moved to its current location in the spring of 1953. The school was granted College Preparatory status in 1982 and changed its name to Xavier College Preparatory.Today, Xavier has over 1,200 (all female) students studying everything from aviation and architecture to chemistry and calculus. Students at Xavier share many classes with students from Brophy College Preparatory, the all-male Jesuit high school that is adjacent to Xavier. However, an emphasis is always placed on the young women that attend the school and curriculum is designed with their best interest in mind. All leadership positions in the administration and student body are filled by women.


== Academics ==
Xavier follows a traditional college preparatory curriculum. Students are required to take classes in English, Mathematics, Catholic Theology, Social Studies, Laboratory Sciences, World Languages, Fine Arts and Physical Education as well as half a semester of Computer Programming. Honors classes are available in all fields of study, and 27 Advanced Placement Classes are available to students in grades 9-12. All seniors are required to take AP Literature. Students are also permitted to take classes at Brophy College Preparatory. Dual Enrollment is available through Rio Salado College  and most classes offer dual credit.  
In the past 10 years, the school has congratulated 82 National Merit Finalists, 143 Commended Scholars, 36 National Hispanic Scholars, and five National Black American Scholars. Xavier students have been designated Presidential Scholars in 1979, 1986, 1990, 2001, 2008, and 2014; Presidential Scholar Semi-Finalists in 1975, 1993, and 2014; and Flinn Scholars in 2004, 2014, and 2016. In the 1990-91, 1994-96, and 2013-14 school years it was honored as a Blue Ribbon school.


== Athletics ==
Xavier has numerous sports teams including teams in cross country, track, crew (rowing), golf, tennis, badminton, cheer, pom, swim/dive, soccer, volleyball, sand volleyball, basketball, softball, archery, shotgun and robotics. Xavier Spiritline cheer won the USA national championship in 2017. Xavier Spiritline pom got second place in the USA national championship in 2017. Xavier also fields championship volleyball, basketball, track and softball teams as well as active club teams in crew, lacrosse, and shooting.


== Notable alumni ==
Betsey Bayless, Secretary of State of Arizona
Amanda Blumenherst, professional golfer
Alana Briggs, published author and professor in Victorian Literature
Aidy Bryant, actress and comedian
Jeanne Collier, diver and Olympic medalist
Heather Farr, professional golfer
Stacey Ferreira, entrepreneur, speaker, and author
Lois Maffeo, musician
Meghan McCain, news commentator
Grace Park, professional golfer
Loret Miller Ruppe, U.S. ambassador and director of the Peace Corps
Emma Stone, actress
Allie Teilz, DJ, model, and actress 
Cheyenne Woods, professional golfer


== References ==


== External links ==
Official school website