Title: HS2000
Aspects: {'XDS'}

The HS2000 (Hrvatski Samokres (Croatian Pistol)), or XD (X-treme Duty) are a series of semi-automatic pistol that are polymer-framed and striker-fired. Manufactured in the city of Karlovac, Croatia by HS Produkt (formerly I.M. Metal), the Springfield Armory XD, XDM, or XD-S is the marketing name for the weapon, which is licensed and sold in the United States by Springfield Armory, Inc.


== History ==

The HS2000 traces its roots back to a service pistol known as the PHP (Prvi Hrvatski Pištolj or First Croatian Pistol), which was first produced in Croatia by privately owned industrial parts firm I. M. Metal in 1991. Designed by a team led by Marko Vuković, the PHP was considered to be a solid design, but early versions were plagued by quality issues, due in large part to the difficulties of manufacturing during the Yugoslav war. Vuković's team continued to tweak and improve the design over the next decade, releasing the HS95 (Hrvatski Samokres or Croatian Pistol) in 1995, and the HS2000 in 1999.
The HS2000 was adopted by the Croatian military and law enforcement as a standard issue sidearm and continues to fill that role today. The pistol was initially exported to the United States market by Intrac and distributed by HSAmerica who sold the pistol in 9 mm as the HS2000.In 2002, Springfield Armory, Inc negotiated licensing rights to the United States market, and changed the name to the XD-9 (X-treme Duty 9×19mm Parabellum). Springfield Armory has since expanded the line to include ten models in three different calibers and five different cartridges, seven barrel lengths, and six finishes (black, black bi-tone, olive drab, olive drab bi-tone, flat dark earth, and flat dark earth bi-tone). In 2006, the industry press awarded the XD-45 the title of Handgun of the Year from both American Rifleman magazine and The Shooting Industry Academy of Excellence. The XD(M) series of pistols won Handgun of the Year again in 2009.In January 2012, Springfield announced a new variant, to be marketed as the XD-S. While it shares many features with the original XD and XDM, its specifications differ in several important ways. The XD-S has a new Pre-Set trigger and a disassembly fail-safe, neither of which is currently incorporated into the XD or XD-M models. The fail-safe disassembly prevents the disassembly lever from being manipulated when there is a magazine in the pistol. Conversely, when the disassembly lever is up, a magazine cannot be inserted into the pistol. This model, at only 1 in (25 mm) wide and initially available only in .45 ACP, is specifically designed for concealed carry. The XD-S .45 ACP has a single stack magazine with a 5 + 1 capacity (with optional 6 + 1 and 7 + 1 magazines available) and a 3.3 in (84 mm) barrel.
In January 2013, Springfield unveiled the XD-S in 9mm. It is identical to the .45 ACP model in size and features. The only differences being that XD-S 9mm has a single stack magazine with a 7 + 1 capacity (with optional 8 + 1 and 9 + 1 magazines available) and the 9mm is marginally heavier due to a smaller (9mm) bore in the barrel (more metal is left behind).
In 2014, Springfield unveiled the XD Mod.2 increasing their XD line up to 33 variants. 
The XD Mod.2 aims to give shooters a more pleasant grip through some ergonomic tweaks. The most notable on the 3-inch barreled sub-compact is what Springfield Armory touts as Grip Zones.
Essentially, the three “Zones” on the grip each have their own unique texturing, promoting a more solid handle on the gun. It is a marked break from the original XD’s design, which boasted much more traditional grip texturing.
Zone 1, on the front of the grip, has an anti-slip surface that is less assertive to work in conjunction with more sensitive parts of the hand. Zone 2, at the rear of the grip, has much more aggressive texturing, encouraging more friction and a firm hold. Zone 3, covering all other areas of the grip, is moderately textured and is meant to support the other two zones.
The pistol also has a new set of sights. Springfield upgraded the front sight to a red fiber optic. The rear sight is still a two dot, though its profile has been lowered, and is still constructed of steel to facilitate its use in racking the slide.


== Design ==

The HS2000 is a short recoil-operated, locked breech, striker fired semi-automatic pistol.
They use a polymer frame with steel inserts, mounting rail and trigger-mounted safety. A Cocked striker indicator protrudes from the rear of the slide when the striker is cocked. A loaded chamber indicator pivots up on top of the slide when a round is in the chamber being both visual and tactile. An ambidextrous magazine release is also standard. Take down of the pistol is through a lever on the left side of the frame that rotates up, allowing the slide to move forward off the frame. This is very similar to the mechanism of take down as seen in pistols manufactured by SIG Sauer. The trigger does not have to be pulled for the pistol to be disassembled, unlike some of its competitors (and even early versions of the XD). The factory-standard trigger has a travel of 13 mm (0.5 in) and is rated at 25 N (5.6 lbf) to 30 N (6.7 lbf). Most HS2000s have dual captive recoil springs; however, the XDM and Tactical 5 in (130 mm) models have non-captive springs. The recoil spring guide rod also acts as a standoff device, as the end of the rod protrudes from under the barrel and keeps the slide in battery when pressed against an object such as someones's chest in contact-distance self-defense situations.  This prevents the slide from being moved back because the device pushes the surface area of objects away from the slide, thus increasing the chance that the gun will function normally.After heat treatment the metal parts are finished with a proprietary nitriding process called Tenifer Plus+. This finish is characterized by extreme wear and corrosion resistance; it penetrates the metal, and treated parts have similar properties even below the surface to a certain depth. The Tenifer Plus+ process produces a matte gray-colored, non-glare surface with a 64 Rockwell C hardness rating and a 1,200–1,300 N/mm2 tensile strength. This finish makes the HS2000 particularly suitable for individuals carrying the pistol concealed, as the highly chloride-resistant finish allows the pistol to better endure the effects of perspiration.
The HS2000 has a grip safety that will not allow the pistol to fire without depressing a lever on the rear of the grip. This feature is present on some older pistols such as the M1911. Unlike the 1911, the grip safety on HS2000 series (except the XD-S line) also locks the slide.  The means without a perfect grip on the gun to depress the grip safety, the slide cannot be cycled to load or clear the gun. In addition to a trigger safety, a drop safety prevents the striker from releasing if the gun is dropped or exposed to a significant impact. As of 2008, 4 in and 5 in XD .45 ACP Service models are available with an optional ambidextrous frame-mounted thumb safety. This option is now available in 9mm, .40 and .45 ACP pistols.The HS2000, except for the XD-S variant, is fed by staggered-column (otherwise known as "double-stack") detachable box magazines that are made of polished stainless steel with a polymer basepad. The empty weight of a standard-sized HS2000 box magazine is 80 g (2.8 oz). The Springfield Armory XDM .45 ACP is offered in three different models with 3.8, 4.5, and 5.25 inch barrels. Each of these models has a 13 + 1 capacity, while the highest capacity is 19 + 1 for the 9mm model. The 3.8 in (97 mm) model is also available with a compact magazine that holds 9 rounds that reduces grip length by one inch for a more comfortable conceal carry option.


== Variants ==

Other variations are available from the Springfield Armory Custom Shop and also some European gun stores.
10-round capacity CA compliant magazines are available for all models except the XDM series and XD-S (whose maximum capacity <10 rounds with or without factory extended magazine).


== Users ==
 Bosnia and Herzegovina: Used by the armed forces.
 Croatia: Standard sidearm of the Croatian Armed Forces and Croatian Police since 1999.
 Dominican Republic: Used by the armed forces.
 France: Used by the RATP.
 Georgia: Standard Issue pistol of Georgian Police, also used by some Army Units.
 Indonesia: Used by the armed forces.
 Iraq: Used by the Iraqi police.
 Macedonia: Used by the armed forces.
 Malaysia: Used by the armed forces.
 Thailand: Used by the armed forces.
 United Kingdom: Trials use only, not adopted.
 United States: Issued or approved for use by a large number of police departments and other law enforcement agencies, including the Chicago Police Department.


== Gallery ==

		
		
		
		


== References ==


== External links ==
Various archived articles at XD-HS2000.com
Other Facts on the XD/HS