Title: The Yale Alley Cats
Aspects: {'YAC'}

The Yale Alley Cats are an all-male, undergraduate a cappella singing group at Yale University. Founded in 1943, they are the third oldest underclassman a cappella group at Yale, at 76 years. While the group’s early repertoire was based primarily in jazz, their current arrangements (all composed by present or former group members) span pop, R&B, Motown, folk, and a variety of other genres. Each year, the Alley Cats perform for public and private audiences throughout the United States and on several international tours.


== History ==
In the summer of 1943, four Yale undergraduate students climbed Saybrook Tower to serenade the night with Henry Carey's "Sally in Our Alley." Their singing awoke the College Master who quickly yelled at them "Stop it! Your singing sounds like a bunch of screeching alley cats!" The Master then silenced the young gentlemen and sent them to bed, but the performance marked the group's founding and taking the name, "The Yale Alley Cats." Since then, the group has created more than 200 a cappella arrangements and completed performance tours around the world, with the travel costs being funded by revenue from performances. Each year the group also hosts a large on-campus performance known as the "Champagne Jamboree," traditionally featuring a female guest soloist and a dance number.


== Music ==
The Yale Alley Cats have entertained audiences world-wide, performing for many notable figures including Martha Stewart, Jay Leno, Stella McCartney, Tom Brokaw, and President Barack Obama. Their 2013 album "Ghost of a Chance," on the Bridge Records, Inc. label, reached the 52nd Grammy Awards entry list for Best Pop Vocal Album. In 2017, they performed for Facebook Headquarters and Google Headquarters on their tour of the California Bay Area, then later for the United Nations headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland, as well as for the United States Embassy in Paris, France. In 2018, the group completed a ten-city tour of China through the invitation of Beijing Shengchou Education Technology Company, including collaborations with the Central Conservatory of Music and other schools and hotels across the nation such as the Little Swan Choir in Xi'an.


== Notable alumni ==
Many Alley Cats go on to join The Yale Whiffenpoofs—a selective, all-senior, all-male a cappella group—and some have gone on to careers in the performing arts, including:

Jacob Clemente '19, starred as Billy in Billy Elliot the Musical
Andy Sandberg '06, Tony Award-winning producer, director, writer, actor
Dave Lieberman '03, host of Good Deal with Dave Lieberman
Josh Singer '94, Academy Award-winning writer, producer
George R. Steel '94, musician, composer
Manoel Felciano '92, actor, singer-songwriter
James Bohanek ‘91, Broadway actor


== Rush ==
Each year, first-years audition in a multi-week process known as "rush."  In the tradition of many Yale a cappella groups, the current Alley Cats “tap” first-year students to sing with the group for three years.


== Discography ==
Since their founding, the Yale Alley Cats have recorded thirty-two albums and one EP, including multiple live albums.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Yale's A Cappella Rush NPR
Samples of Alley Cat Performances
Current roster and biographies