Title: List of Touhou Project characters
Aspects: {'Yakumo'}

This is a list of the characters that belong to the Touhou Project, a series of games by ZUN from Team Shanghai Alice. Most Touhou characters reside in a fictional realm called Gensokyo, where humans and yōkai coexist. Though the yōkai do often prey on the humans while the humans try to exorcise them, no racial animosity actually exists between the two. The characters also have unique abilities. Since the PC-98 games (from Highly Responsive to Prayers to Mystic Square) are relatively obscure, the characters in and after The Embodiment of Scarlet Devil are more widely recognized and popular.
All characters except the two main protagonists (Reimu and Marisa) are listed by the first game of their appearance.


== Protagonists ==


=== Reimu Hakurei ===

Species: Human
Ability: Ability of flight, using yin-yang orbs, and godly powers. Ability as the Hakurei Miko.
Residence: Hakurei ShrineReimu Hakurei (博麗 霊夢, Hakurei Reimu) is the main protagonist of the series. Even without doing any training, she is fairly strong. Since her freedom is to the level of the impossible, she does have a negative disposition. Because she does not believe at all that hard work pays off, she hates putting in a great amount of effort for something. As she has a simple and not double-sided personality, her human emotions are tempestuous, and she often has hasty conversations with angry words. She has a strange atmosphere that attracts others regardless of whether they are human or yokai. Since her job is yokai extermination, she takes a stern pose against yokai, but she herself does not have a particular interest in humans or yokai. With an impartial personality that is neither gentle nor stern towards anyone, in Silent Sinner in Blue she looked after the fainted yokai rabbit and in Curiosities of Lotus Asia for some reason or another made a surprise attack on a yokai who was enjoying reading her book, and stole her book. Since she likes yokai extermination itself, when incidents do not occur for a long time, it was shown that she grew irritated due to not being able to perform yokai extermination. This is a personality that especially strong yokai like, but since at times she exterminates yokai without even any talk, she is feared by the weaker yokai. It is a carefree personality, but on the opposite side of her impartial nature, she does not see anyone as a companion, and even when she acts together with other humans or yokai, she is always alone. As she is ruthless in her job, especially in the middle of yokai extermination, she exterminates the yokai and fairies she comes across without mercy. She is also similar to Alice Margatroid in having a personality of not showing her true power due to nothing being left afterwards if she lost with her full power. She is "fairly tall." From Rinnosuke Morichika's viewpoint, she has good relations with Marisa Kirisame. Meanwhile, there was not an instance where she fought together with Marisa. When she confronted Watatsuki no Yorihime in Silent Sinner in Blue, she did not cooperate with her allies Marisa, Remilia Scarlet, and Sakuya Izayoi.
She serves the role of the miko of the Hakurei Shrine located at the boundary between Gensokyo and the outside world, called the "Miko of Hakurei." The job of the miko of the Hakurei shrine is to exterminate yokai and resolve incidents, and Reimu herself possesses strong power, but she habitually lives a life of drinking tea and having naps, she does not have enough training. The plentiful livelihood of Gensokyo is sustained by the maintenance of the indispensable relationship of yokai attacking humans and humans exterminating yokai, and the Miko of Hakurei plays a part in that. Since the Miko of Hakurei also in an indispensable position of maintaining Gensokyo, it has become forbidden for the Miko of Hakurei to exterminate yokai and for yokai to attack the miko, not to mention humans coming to the Hakurei Shrine grounds to meddle. However, since the relation of yokai attacking humans has thus been lost, yokai have been in decline, so Reimu approved of a request she received from yokai to establish battle rules for bouts with yokai and kill time, thus preserving the relation between yokai and humans in a mock style, allowing strong and weak ones to have equal fights without bad aftertastes, called the "spell card rules" in the "Spell Naming Law." The customs related to the job have been preserved from time immemorial without fail, and as she follows the custom, she takes an attitude of not worrying about the results.
Her main abilities are flying in the sky, good intuition, and getting along with everyone; even those who were once her enemies. In the games, she is characterized by her homing amulets and yin-yang orbs. In addition to being in all of the Touhou games (save Touhou 9.5 and 12.8), she is featured in Graffiti Kingdom as "Flying Maiden", in which ZUN is involved. Due to the way she is often dressed, Reimu's exposed armpits are often used as targets for Internet jokes and memes.


=== Marisa Kirisame ===

Species: Human
Ability: Ability to use magic
Residence: Forest of MagicMarisa Kirisame (霧雨 魔理沙, Kirisame Marisa) is a human magician who lives in a cluttered house in the Forest of Magic. She is friends with Reimu and visits her often, but is otherwise solitary and spends most of her time researching magic. She is an avid collector, bordering on having a hoarding disorder, often "borrowing" things without permission from various other characters. She talks in a very brash, direct, and often rude way, highlighting her tomboyish nature and otherwise devil-may-care attitude. While she is prone to violence, selfishness, and other disagreeable behaviors, she is also honest and a hard worker, usually on the front lines of defending Gensokyo whenever an incident occurs. She is contrasted with Reimu, the naturally-talented protagonist, as Marisa's powers derive entirely from hard work and determination rather than any abilities she was born with. In the games, her attacks are characterized by five-point star motifs and lasers, and other high-level destructive magic. Consistent to her "borrowing" habit, many of her spells are inspired by other characters, such as her signature move "Master Spark" which was originally Yuka Kazami's, or her "Nondirectional Laser" attack, which was originally Patchouli's attack. She is "fairly short." 


== Additional game characters ==


=== Highly Responsive to Prayers ===
SinGyoku (しんぎょく)
The stage 5 boss. The gatekeeper of the Hakurei Shrine. Has three forms: a yin yang, a priestess or a priest.YuugenMagan (幽玄魔眼, Yūgenmagan)
The stage 10 boss of the Makai route. A hovering set of evil eyes, connected by electricity.Elis (エリス, Erisu)Species: Devil
Residence: Ruins of VinaThe innocent devil, stage 15 boss of the Makai route.Sariel (サリエル, Sarieru)Species: Angel
Residence: Fallen ShrineThe Angel of Death, final boss of the Makai route.

Mima (魅魔)Species: Ghost
Ability: Black Magic
Residence: Hakurei ShrineFirst appearing as the stage 10 boss of the Jigoku route, Mima returns in later PC-98 games with much greater roles. She is a Ghost that haunts the area around the Hakurei Shrine. She is very confident in her abilities, and even boastful of them. Although she claims during Story of Eastern Wonderland to want revenge against the entire human race, it's not known what Mima's motivations for that are. She is also attempting to revive herself. Although she is often called a ghost, during Phantasmagoria of Dim. Dream, Mima denies being dead and tries to explain herself as being "just a soul."Kikuri (キクリ)
Stage 15 boss of the Jigoku route. Alternately named the "Hellish Moon", she is a bronze moon-like orb surrounded by a sickly purple aura and engraved with the image of a young girl.Konngara (こんがら, Kongara)
The Astral Knight, final boss of the Jigoku route.


=== Story of Eastern Wonderland ===
Genjii (玄爺)Species: Turtle
Ability: Flight
Residence: Hakurei ShrineReimu's pet turtle that she caught during her training. As he had lived for a very long time, he gained many mystic powers, one of which is to fly. Reimu rides on him to fly, for Touhou 2 to 5, but after that she learned to fly by herself, and Genjii has not been seen since then. ZUN has confirmed during an interview that Genjii lives in the pond behind the shrine.Rika (里香)Species: HumanAn engineer in Gensokyo that is the boss of stage 1 and the extra stage. She pilots the "Flower Tank" on stage one and "Evil Eye Sigma" on the extra stage. Unlike many other scrolling shooters where mechs are the primary enemy, Rika is the only character in the series to pilot vehicles in a boss fight.Meira (明羅)Species: Human
Residence: Forest of MagicA female samurai that is the stage 2 boss. She is seeking the power of the Hakurei family.


=== Phantasmagoria of Dim. Dream ===

Ellen (エレン, Eren)Species: Witch
Ability: Inability to grow old, magicEllen is a witch who is eternally young. In fact, she has lived so long she never remembers anything. Has a cat named Sokrates. She has a cameo from the manga Hatarakimono by Izumi Takemoto, who ZUN is a fan of.

Kotohime (小兎姫)Species: HumanA princess who claims to be a police officer. She does not act as befits her rank, and is known to be a collector in things where other people find no interest in.

Kana Anaberal (カナ・アナベラル, Kana Anaberaru)Species: PoltergeistA one-sided poltergeist created by a mentally unstable girl. As the inhabitants of her house have stopped taking any notice of her, she is looking for another place to haunt.

Rikako Asakura (朝倉 理香子, Asakura Rikako)Species: HumanOne of the few believers in science in Gensokyo. However, she is also a considerably powerful magic user. Though she does not like magic much, science alone won't get her anywhere, so she mixes both. She is the only meganekko in the PC-98 series, but not the only in the whole Touhou series.

Chiyuri Kitashirakawa (北白河 ちゆり, Kitashirakawa Chiyuri, alternate spelling Tiyuri Kitashirakawa)Species: Human
Ability: Artificial Magic
Residence: Dream RuinsYumemi's assistant who acts overly familiar towards her. It seems their relationship is not simply boss/subordinate. Although she looks too young to be an assistant professor, it's because she earned her Ph.D. (in comparative physics) at the age of 15. Speaks rather strangely, especially for a young girl. Most of her mannerisms were later adopted by Marisa.

Yumemi Okazaki (岡崎 夢美, Okazaki Yumemi)Species: Human
Ability: Artificial Magic
Residence: Dream RuinsProfessor of comparative physics at an unnamed university in a world beyond Gensokyo. In this world, a grand unification theory has been developed; when Yumemi presented an expanded theory that included magic to her academic society, she was laughed at. She came to Gensokyo to do research and make her case infallible.

Ruukoto (るーこと, Rūkoto)Species: Robot
Residence: Hakurei ShrineA nuclear-powered maid that Reimu requested in the ending of Phantasmagoria of Dim. Dream. She is the only non-controllable and non-fightable Touhou character to have appeared in an official Touhou game.


=== Lotus Land Story ===

Orange (オレンジ, Orenji)Species: Yōkai
Residence: Mountain PathA very minor yōkai who happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. In the game, her name appears as two question marks, and "Orange" is only revealed in the character profiles of the game.

Kurumi (くるみ)Species: Vampire
Residence: Lake of BloodKurumi is a vampiress that lives on an island in the center of the Lake of Blood. She guards the lake and prevents others from passing by unhindered.

Elly (エリー, Erī, alternate spelling Elliy)Residence: MugenkanElly is the gate guard of Mugenkan. Though seemingly powerful, the mansion rarely has any visitors, and thus she is out of practice as far as danmaku is concerned.

Yuuka (幽香, Yūka, alternate spelling Yuka)Species: Yōkai
Residence: MugenkanYuuka is a powerful yōkai who lives in a mansion, Mugenkan, on the boundary between the dream world and the real world. In Lotus Land Story, an unknown act of hers radiated magical power across the worlds, sending the evil spirits in Reimu's shrine into a frenzy and attracting Marisa's notice and curiosity. She is often seen carrying a parasol, which is capable of firing the "Kyokutai Laser." This laser is later adopted by Marisa as her signature "Master Spark."For her later appearance in Phantasmagoria of Flower View, see Yuka Kazami.

Mugetsu (夢月, Mugetsu, alternate spelling Mugetu)Species: DemonA human-looking, blonde-haired girl in a maid uniform. Younger twin sister of Gengetsu. Although she is dressed like a servant, she tells the player characters that the area in which they fight is her world; it doesn't seem she works for Yuuka or anybody else.

Gengetsu (幻月, Gengetsu, alternate spelling Gengetu)Species: DemonA blonde girl in pink with red bows and white, angel-like wings. Older twin sister of Mugetsu. Seems to be the stronger of the two.


=== Mystic Square ===

Sara (サラ)Species: Yōkai
Residence: A mountain cave that holds a doorway to MakaiThe gatekeeper of Makai. Her name comes from the Sara from Izumi Takemoto's short manga Crystal Egg.

Louise (ルイズ, Ruizu, alternate spelling Luize)Species: Demon
Residence: MakaiA resident of Makai, she attacks the main characters as they are invading. Her name comes from the character in Izumi Takemoto's short manga Downtown Stories: Rooftop Serenade.

Alice (アリス, Arisu)Species: Yōkai magician
Ability: Magic, Manipulation of Dolls
Residence: PandæmoniumA girl whose powers come from the forbidden "Grimoire of Alice" and is quite powerless without it. She first appears in stage 3, trying to stop the protagonists but fails eventually, she then returns in the extra stage. She is a reference to the Alices of Shin Megami Tensei, Asura Blade: Sword of Dynasty, and Alice in Wonderland.For her later appearances in the Windows games, see Alice Margatroid.

Yuki (ユキ)Species: Magician
Ability: Fire Magic
Residence: MakaiA black witch who appears with Mai on the fourth stage, and is angered when Mai is defeated before she is. Specializes in fire magic.

Mai (マイ)Species: Magician
Ability: Ice Magic
Residence: MakaiA white witch who appears with Yuki on the fourth stage, and fights more seriously when Yuki is defeated before her. Specializes in ice magic.

Yumeko (夢子)Species: Demon
Residence: PandæmoniumA sword-throwing maid who serves Shinki, she is ranked in the top class in the Makai.

Shinki (神綺)Species: Goddess
Residence: PandæmoniumThe creator of Makai. Because she is the maker of everything in Makai, the residents of Makai see her as God. As the final boss, she personally rains the punishment on the four intruders of Makai.


=== The Embodiment of Scarlet Devil ===

Rumia (ルーミア, Rūmia, alternate spelling Lumia)Species: Yōkai
Ability: About enough power to manipulate darkness
Residence: UnknownBoss of Stage 1. She is a yōkai who has the physical appearance of a young girl. She has blond hair, red eyes, wears black clothing, and her hair is wrapped in a red ribbon. This ribbon is an ofuda, and Rumia herself cannot touch it. She is "short." Her ability is to create a sphere of night around her, but as it impedes her own vision significantly, it is not useful in combat. She usually spends her days fluttering around aimlessly.

Daiyousei (大妖精, Daiyōsei)Species: Fairy
Residence: Misty LakeStage 2 mid-boss. An almost inconsequential character who received no character profile in the game; fans named her Daiyousei (lit. "Big/Great Fairy"). ZUN later attributed her as bright, playful, and full of expressions. Sometimes appears in dōjinshi with Cirno.

Cirno (チルノ, Chiruno)Species: Ice fairy
Ability: About enough power to manipulate ice
Residence: Misty LakeStage 2 boss, and a playable character in Touhou Hisōtensoku, Fairy Wars and Hidden Star in Four Seasons. An ice fairy that lives on the lake surrounding the Scarlet Devil Mansion. Although she is weak from the players' perspective, she is one of the strongest of her kind in Gensokyo. Her hobby is freezing frogs and watching them revive as they thaw, but she tends to shatter them instead by accident. Unlike Letty Whiterock, she radiates cold air year-round, and can stay awake even in spring and summer. She is "short." She is often called "⑨" (pronounced "nineball") by fans, and the character "⑨" is regarded as a symbol of "Baka" (Stupid), since ZUN labeled her as such in the manual of Phantasmagoria of Flower View.  She is also one of the mascots of the 9front operating system.

Hong Meiling (紅 美鈴, Hon Meirin, alternate spelling Hoan Meiling, Hong Meirin)Species: Yōkai
Ability: About enough power to manipulate qi
Residence: Scarlet Devil MansionStage 3 boss. A Chinese girl serving as the door guard of the Scarlet Devil Mansion. Canonically, she is known to be a very humanoid yōkai who practices martial arts, but is generally friendly towards humans. However, as Japanese fans find it hard to remember her name and it was initially unclear whether the kanji should be read as Japanese or Chinese, she is often referred to just as "Chūgoku" (meaning China). Either way, she still became a very popular and beloved character in the series. In dōjinshi, she is usually portrayed as a joke character, constantly being abused by the other residents of the Scarlet Devil Mansion in some rather humorous ways, especially Sakuya. In terms of popularity, though, she defeated all characters from TH6-8 to win the second Touhou Saimoe popularity contest, and was added as a playable character in a patch for Immaterial and Missing Power, despite not having a story of her own. In Touhou Hisōtensoku, she is reintroduced as a playable character with her own storyline. She has aqua-colored eyes and long, scarlet hair that symbolizes both her name and the place that she's guarding. She is "tall." 

Koakuma (小悪魔)Species: Devil
Residence: Scarlet Devil MansionStage 4 mid-boss. Similar to Daiyousei, she received no character profile in the game and was named Koakuma (lit. "Little Devil") by fans. However, she is quite popular considering her status, more so than some of the lesser liked stage bosses. ZUN later described her to be like Daiyousei — whimsical, enjoys pranks, and doesn't think before doing. He also added that while devils are powerful as vampires and magicians, Koakuma is a rather weak one, therefore, she is a Koakuma (Little Devil).

Patchouli Knowledge (パチュリー・ノーレッジ, Pachurī Nōrejji)Species: Witch
Ability: About enough power to manipulate elemental magic, like fire, water, wood, metal, earth, sun, and moon
Residence: Scarlet Devil MansionStage 4 boss, and a playable character in Immaterial and Missing Power, and Scarlet Weather Rhapsody. A scholar who is a friend of Remilia Scarlet's. She resides in the library of the Scarlet Devil Mansion, and is the de facto librarian. In fact, she rarely leaves it and is somewhat of a hikikomori. She has command over the seven elements (which the Japanese days of the week are named after, making her the "One-week Wizard") and is in theory an extremely powerful magician. However, her constitution is very poor and asthma often prevents her from reciting her spells. She has a tenuous relationship with Marisa, who tends to carry off her books without asking. She is "fairly short." 

Sakuya Izayoi (十六夜 咲夜, Izayoi Sakuya)Species: Human
Ability: About enough power to manipulate time
Residence: Scarlet Devil MansionStage 5 boss, and a playable character in Touhou games 7-9, 10.5, 12.3, and 14. She is the head maid of the Scarlet Devil Mansion.Sakuya is the only human living in the Scarlet Devil Mansion. She essentially takes the position of managing the Scarlet Devil Mansion. She uses humble speech to her mistress Remilia Scarlet and friend Patchouli Knowledge, and uses less formal speech to other people.She is "tall."  The color of her eyes changes with each work. As for her age, ZUN directly stated that "she plays the role of a human maid about 10~20 years old" and "perhaps she is a character in her early teens, and in Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, according to Hieda no Akyuu, "she claims to be in her late teens."She possesses an ability to manipulate time, so she is able to stop time. Furthermore, it also seems like she is able to change the speed of the flow of time. However, as it is difficult to reverse events that have already occurred, and since she is not able to return broken things to how they were originally even if she reversed time, in reality, it is not possible to reverse time. However, she is able to do things to the extent of moving things back to where they were originally. She is also able to tamper with space, which is very closely related to time.She possesses a great amount of silver throwing knives and is skilled at handling them, and with only her ability to manipulate time, she is skilled in conjuring knives from nowhere. According to ZUN, it seems like her throwing knife arm and her cooking arm are comparable, and therefore is skilled at cooking.She was not born in Gensokyo, and the name "Sakuya Izayoi" was given to her by Remilia Scarlet. In Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, Akyuu guessed that she might have originally been a vampire hunter. A recurring joke with Sakuya in dōjinshi usually involves her stabbing Hong Meirin mercilessly with her many knives, usually due to Meirin's laziness or inability to keep unwanted visitors, such as Reimu and Marisa, out of the mansion. However, Sakuya does care for Meirin's well-being, as demonstrated in Eastern and Little Nature Deity / Strange and Bright Nature Deity.At the time of Embodiment of Scarlet Devil, she merely worked at the Scarlet Devil Mansion in return for food. Continuing in Imperishable Night, she did not worry at all about the clothing, food or housing and felt satisfied. Meanwhile, she is utterly devoted to her mistress.

Remilia Scarlet (レミリア・スカーレット, Remiria Sukāretto)Species: Vampire
Ability: About enough power to manipulate fate
Residence: Scarlet Devil MansionFinal boss, and a playable character in Touhou 7.5, 8, 10.5 and 12.3. Remilia is the vampiric mistress of the Scarlet Devil Mansion who claims to be descended from Vlad III Dracula although she is not. She is known as the Scarlet Devil as when she feeds, the blood of her victims stains her dress red. Apart from her unpleasant needs, she is hardly malicious enough to deserve such a title; merely childish, even though she is over five hundred years old. Although being a vampire is normally a lonely life, she has a good relationship with her many employees (including Sakuya and Meirin). Reimu is one of the few humans who tolerates her, and Remilia seems quite fond of her in turn. Marisa also gets along with her in exchange for access to her library. Her power is the control of fate (which has never been overtly demonstrated in the games). She prefers melee fighting to danmaku, but when she does resort to the latter, she is fond of red round bullets and knives. She is "short."  
Flandre Scarlet (フランドール・スカーレット, Furandōru Sukāretto, alternate spelling Frandre Scarlet, Frandle Scarlet)Species: Vampire
Ability: About enough power to destroy anything at all
Residence: Scarlet Devil MansionExtra stage boss. Remilia's little sister, she is not allowed to leave the mansion. Despite this, she likes her sister and doesn't usually try to escape. Most vampires hold back somewhat when fighting humans, as they plan to keep them alive and feed from them later, but Flandre was always fed prepared dishes and does not know her food comes from humans. Thus, when fighting them, she does not hesitate and incinerates them without a second thought. In dōjinshi, she is very fond of Reimu and Marisa and is often portrayed as somewhat crazy, though alternate portrayals as a sweet "Little Sister"-type are also popular. She is "short." Her theme music, "U.N. Owen Was Her?" was based on the book And Then There Were None by Agatha Christie. "U.N. Owen" was a mysterious figure known to scheme people in the novel.


=== Perfect Cherry Blossom ===

Letty Whiterock (レティ・ホワイトロック, Reti Howaitorokku)Species: Yuki-onna
Ability: About enough power to manipulate chillinessStage 1 boss. She is a yōkai who only appears during winter. In Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, it was written that she was a type of yuki-onna.She is "fairly tall." She possesses an ability to manipulate chilliness. According to Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, since this is equivalent to an ability that manipulates the winter within nature, she possesses tremendous power according to the environment, but she is pretty much powerless outside of winter. In Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red, Letty herself said that outside of winter, she hides away in a place where not a ray of sunlight can reach.

Chen (橙)Species: Beast (Bakeneko possessed as Shikigami)
Ability: About enough power to handle sorcery (while possessed as shikigami) and surprise people (as bakeneko)
Residence: Yokai MountainStage 2 boss and extra stage midboss. She has two tails and is a bakeneko yokai. She is also Ran Yakumo's shikigami, but since Ran herself is a shikigami of Yukari Yakumo, she is a "shikigami of a shikigami" from Yukari's viewpoint.She is "short." Chen, as a bakeneko, acquires powers of a wrathful god while possessed, but since the one of whom she is a shikigami of, Ran, is also a shikigami, her ability is fairly low. This shikigami possession is removed when she is soaked in water, and since she also hates water as a cat, she is in any case weak to water.She ordinarily lives in Youkai Mountain. In Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red, she made the village of cats and tried to stand as the leader, but the progress has been unfavorable.

Alice Margatroid (アリス・マーガトロイド, Arisu Māgatoroido)Species: Magician
Ability: About enough power to use magical dolls
Residence: Forest of MagicShe is a magician who lives in the Forest of Magic.In appearance, she has blond hair and has pale skin, and at one glance she has the appearance of a doll. She is "fairly tall."  The color of her eyes changes with each work.She is an all-purpose-type of magician without strengths and weaknesses in attributes. With a personality that is indifferent to other people, she is attached to magic, and is usually confident but is also timid in one aspect.According to Pefect Memento in Strict Sense, Alice was originally a human, and upon completion of some training, she became a magician. It has not been long since the day she has become a magician, and because of this, it seems like she still continues human habits like eating and sleeping that were originally not necessary.As her specialty is making dolls, she is also able to manipulate a great amount of dolls at the same time. This skillfulness is among the finest in Gensokyo. She is able to make her dolls move pretty much any way humans can, and other than that she can make multiple dolls perform different actions, sometimes making them cooperate and sometimes making them move completely asynchronously, such that to onlookers around her, it might not seem like she is manipulating them. The dolls are also able to manipulate dolls, but it seems like she does it all by herself only when it comes to the task of creating the dolls.She has a residence in the Forest of Magic. According to Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, maybe since she was originally a human, even as a yokai, she has high understanding and friendship level to humans and presents a low danger level, and if someone gets lost in the forest, she also gladly gives shelter upon arriving at her house. However, Alice's house is covered all over with dolls, and since she is not very eager for conversation, it seems like she immediately flees when there is something eerie. In chapters 5-6 of Strange and Bright Nature Deity, the Three Fairies of Light accidentally arrived at her house, and Alice was hospitable to them.According to Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, she does not perform the usual act of attacking humans, but unexpectedly likes fights and upon receiving a challenge to do battle, gladly accepts. As she manipulates a great number of combat dolls, the challenger is likely to be highly outnumbered, making a difficult battle inevitable, but since she has her hands full with manipulating the dolls, that is her weakness.Since she does not find it enjoyable to win battles with overwhelming power, she usually fights with power that is a little more than that of the opponent. Also, since it would be the end of the ropes if she was defeated while putting forth her true power, she does not give it her all in fights, which is similar in personality to Reimu Hakurei.In the character settings text for Imperishbable Night, it was written that she was an indoors type who was often alone, but in Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, the range of her place of activities is set to "any kind of place" in Gensokyo, and she also appeared in front of people in times of festivals to exhibit her skill with dolls. In each ending of Imperishable Night and Immaterial and Missing Power, she participated in banquets at the Hakurei Shrine. She also said things that hinted that she sometimes visits the library of the Scarlet Devil Mansion.According to ZUN's comments in the Music Room of Perfect Cherry Blossom, Alice is a little special as a character of the Touhou Series, and because of that, he composed her theme with renewed vigor.

Lily White (リリーホワイト, Rirī Howaito, alternate spelling Lilywhite)Species: Fairy
Ability: About enough power to tell about the coming of springA fairy that heralds the arrival of spring. However, since she expresses herself with danmaku rather than words, her announcement is usually seen as a hostile attack. She is the first midboss to receive an official character profile. In the "Muenzuka" stage of Phantasmasgoria of Flower View, a black version of Lily White shows up instead of the normal version. Fans have named her Lily Black, and gave her a darker character as opposed to the cheerful Lily White.

Prismriver Sisters (プリズムリバー三姉妹, Purizumuribā San-shimai)Species: Poltergeists
Ability: About enough power to play musical instruments without hands or feet
Residence: Poltergeist MansionBosses of stage 4. They are poltergeists in the shape of three sisters. They were originally daughters of a human noble, but an unfortunate event caused his four daughters to separate. The fourth daughter, Layla Prismriver, was unable to leave the mansion that held so many of her memories. Using her power, she conjured poltergeists with the appearance of her older sisters, then slowly became forgotten along with the mansion and the poltergeists. Even though the humans died with the passage of time, the poltergeists continue their noisy lives in that mansion to this day. The three Prismriver Sisters, now musical performers of some note, were employed by Yuyuko Saigyouji to provide entertainment for the upcoming flower-viewing. The protagonists encounter them at the gate to the netherworld.

Lunasa Prismriver (ルナサ・プリズムリバー, Runasa Purizumuribā)Ability: About enough power to play melancholic notesThe eldest of the Prismriver Sisters. She plays the violin and prefers solo performances. Honest to a fault, she is perhaps the most well-adjusted of the sisters. The player fights her first if the player is playing as Reimu. She is "fairly short." 

Merlin Prismriver (メルラン・プリズムリバー, Meruran Purizumuribā, alternate spelling Marlin Prismriver)Ability: About enough power to play maniac notesThe middle child of the Prismriver Sisters. She plays the trumpet. Her magic is the strongest of the three sisters, but her technique is not very good. Despite this, she is cheerful and tends to obsess over things. The player fight her first if the player is playing as Sakuya. She is "fairly short." 

Lyrica Prismriver (リリカ・プリズムリバー, Ririka Purizumuribā)Ability: About enough power to play illusionary notesThe youngest of the poltergeist Prismriver Sisters. Although skilled with all instruments, she prefers keyboard and percussion. She is clever and manipulative, usually goading her older sisters into doing her fighting rather than engaging in battle herself. The player fights her first if the player is playing as Marisa. She is "short." 

Youmu Konpaku (魂魄 妖夢, Konpaku Yōmu, alternate spelling Youmu Kompaku)Species: Half-human half-phantom
Ability: About enough power to handle sword techniques
Residence: HakugyokurōStage 5 boss and stage 6 midboss, in addition, she is a playable character in Touhou 7.5-9, 10.5, 12.3 and 13 as well. Youmu is, as a gardener attached to the Saigyouji family and the bodyguard of Yuyuko Saigyouji, a swordsperson of a two sword school of fencing.One sword is the Roukanken, which possesses power to kill ten yuurei in one slice, which she carries from her left shoulder to her right waist, and she carries the Hakurouken on her left waist, which slices through people's confusion. The longer sword is the Roukanken, and it has been conveyed that it was forged by yokai. The shorter sword is the Hakurouken, which seems to be the heirloom of the Konpaku family.According to the Saigyouji family, Youmu is the second generation to take her position, the former generation being Youki Konpaku. Youki was Youmu's fencing shishō (instructor). Youmu is also Yuyuko's sword instructor, but she is fundamentally treated as a gardener.She is "fairly short."  The color of her eyes changes after Perfect Cherry Blossom and Imperishable Night. As she is a mixture of human and yuurei, she has a half-human half-yokai existence, and the large yuurei (半幽霊, hanyuurei, 半霊, hanrei) that always follows her is the yuurei half of her body. In Perfect Memento in Strict Sense, Youmu (the one taking the appearance as a girl) was treated as "half-human half-yuurei," and the yuurei was treated as "yuurei," and it was supposed that Youmu (the half-human half-yuurei) manipulates the yuurei consciously. Youmu has a lower body temperature compared to normal humans and a higher body temperature compared to normal yuurei. In the Imperishable Night manual, it was written, "she has two kinds of body: human and yuurei," showing Youmu to be "human" and the yuurei to be "yuurei."Those who are a mixture of human and yuurei are a species with long lifespan, but in Seasonal Dream Vision, since it has still not been 60 years since the time she was born, in Phantasmagoria of Flower View, she was not very knowledgeable about the "flower incident that occurs once every 60 years."As she has a straightforward diligent personality, she is often manipulated by those around her (espsecially Yuyuko). For this reason, she often fails at her task, but that does not mean that she has no real power, and she especially excels at instantaneous force and concentration power. In Immaterial and Missing Power, as literally stated by the shishō, "truth-slashing is something which you know," so she often performs tsujigiri-like moves, but Suika Ibuki pointed out that she does not think that Youmu understood her shishō's teachings.She has strong sensitivity, and in the good ending of Imperishable Night, upon receiving the insanity of the moon, she became affected with eyes of insanity. She is afraid of ghost stories, dares, and darkness, but she is calm with regards to yuurei since she is half yuurei herself. Much further on in Ten Desires, as a result of being mistaken as a hermit, she temporarily mistook herself as being a hermit.In Perfect Cherry Blossom, she gathered all of Gensokyo's spring at Yuyuko's instruction, which was the reason Gensokyo's winter did not end. In Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red and Chapter 13 of Curiosities of Lotus Asia, she took on the responsibility for collecting and returning the yuurei that have gone to Gensokyo as a result of the thinning of the barrier of the Netherworld.

Yuyuko Saigyouji (西行寺 幽々子, Saigyōji Yuyuko, alternate spelling Yuyuko Saigyouzi)Species: Ghost
Ability: About enough power to manipulate death and departed souls
Residence: HakugyokurōFinal stage boss, also a playable character in Touhou 7.5, 8, 10.5 and 12.3 and Stage 1 boss of Ten Desires. Yuyuko is the princess of the netherworld pagoda, Hakugyokurō. She is a ghost, but unlike most of her kind, looks entirely human. She was a human, cursed with the power to bring death to others; this ability caused her to eventually commit suicide using her life to seal away an ancient evil residing in a yokai cherry blossom tree. Living in the netherworld, she doesn't socialize much with the rest of Gensokyo. Her only friend from outside is Yukari. Her family name Saigyouji suggests relations with the famed poet Saigyo. Yuyuko, at first appearance, is a ditz; her mental processes seem to be dedicated mainly to teasing her gardener and servant, Youmu, and anticipating her next meal. However, her usual manner conceals a sharp mind and an almost prenatural depth of insight. For instance, she was the only one to perceive what sort of being Huziwara no Mokou was at first sight. Yuyuko has the power to invoke death in any mortal; however, she uses it rarely and with discretion. Her danmaku are characterized by butterfly-shaped bullets. She is "fairly tall." 

Ran Yakumo (八雲 藍, Yakumo Ran)Species: Shikigami (Kitsune)
Ability: About enough power to use shikigami
Residence: The boundaries of GensokyoExtra stage boss and Phantasm stage midboss. A nine-tailed fox yōkai whom Yukari Yakumo made her shikigami. She is considerably powerful even without her master's support; among other things, she uses this power to maintain her own shikigami, Chen. Since Yukari sleeps twelve hours a day, she handles the work during these times. In dōjinshi, she is often depicted as a harassed servant, doing all the work for her lazy master. She is "fairly tall." 

Yukari Yakumo (八雲 紫, Yakumo Yukari)Species: Yōkai
Ability: About enough power to manipulate space and boundaries
Residence: The boundaries of GensokyoPhantasm stage boss, and playable in Touhou 7.5, 8, 10.5 and 12.3. Yukari is an elder yōkai who dwells on the border of Gensokyo, and may predate the existence of the realm itself. A good friend of Yuyuko's and an acquaintance of Reimu's. She is the self-appointed stewardess of the seal between Gensokyo and the outside world, but doesn't do a particularly good job of it. Most of the time, she is asleep, leaving all the work to her shikigami Ran and Ran's shikigami Chen. When she isn't, she tends to amuse herself by pulling in unprepared humans from the outside world and stranding them in Gensokyo. A very irresponsible yōkai. Her calculation and mathematical skills far exceeds that of Ran, being Ran's master. Her ability is the manipulation of boundaries, and this is in terms of the physical and metaphorical. And such boundaries distinguish her spell cards. Often, though, she just summons her shikigami and various others to create her danmaku for her. She is "tall." 


=== Immaterial and Missing Power ===

Suika Ibuki (伊吹 萃香, Ibuki Suika)Species: Oni
Ability: About enough power to manipulate density and sparseness
Residence: UnknownA girl who insists that she is an oni, even though Gensokyo supposedly doesn't have any. Suika and Yugi Hoshiguma were once part of the four devas of the mountains, long ago before the oni retreated underground. As an oni, she loves drinks, feasts, and competition. Despite her small size, she is strong in strength, speed, and mystic powers; she is also several hundred years old. Using her ability to control density, she can gather people to form a banquet, or she can scatter herself to become mist. In Immaterial and Missing Power, she made the residents of Gensokyo have feasts one night after another, intending to draw the joyous oni from hiding.
In Japanese, the pronunciation of her name is the same as watermelon, so this word becomes her common nickname.


=== Imperishable Night ===

Wriggle Nightbug (リグル・ナイトバグ, Riguru Naitobagu)Species: Yōkai firefly
Ability: About enough power to manipulate insects
Residence: Various thicketsStage 1 boss. Insects collect around her, and so she often can be seen in the middle of a swarm of insects. With her powers, she can manipulate the flickerings of fireflies with timed synchronicity, or summon swarms of poisonous insects to kill an enemy. Like insects, she is afraid of pesticides and the cold. In game she is seen wearing a cape and pant-like bloomers, which led fans to believe she was a boy. Also seen in fanworks with Yuka and other insect/flower characters.

Mystia Lorelei (ミスティア・ローレライ, Misutia Rōrerai)Species: Night sparrow
Ability: About enough power to drive humans insane by singing
Residence: Road of MonstersStage 2 boss and playable character in Touhou 9. A night sparrow that dwells on a road near a human village. She conceals herself by blinding travelers who walk along the road at night, then lures them astray, upon which they disappear without a trace. She is carefree, innocent and loves to sing- considering her nightly activities nothing more than a game. An incident in Imperishable Night in which she was apparently eaten by Yuyuko made her a popular joke character. However, she returned in Phantasmagoria of Flower View.

Keine Kamishirasawa (上白沢 慧音, Kamishirasawa Keine)Species: Were-hakutaku
Ability: About enough power to consume history (as a human) and create history (as a hakutaku)
Residence: Human VillageStage 3 boss. Although half-human and half-beast, she appears perfectly human except during the full moon, when she grows horns. She was not born with therianthropy, and only became a were-hakutaku due to an unknown incident. She loves humans, and considers it her duty to protect the human village, by consuming the village's history to hide it when malicious yōkai pass by; her special ability. However, she is trigger-happy and sometimes mistakes ordinary travelers for such malicious yōkai. Keine opened a terakoya in the village and spends her time teaching children and compiling historical records. She seems to be good friends with Huziwara no Mokou. She has a very strong desire to protect humans, and is probably the safest person for anyone in Gensokyo to be around.

Tewi Inaba (因幡 てゐ, Inaba Tewi, alternate spelling Tei Inaba)Species: Yōkai rabbit
Ability: About enough power to confer good luck to humans
Residence: EienteiStage 5 midboss and playable character in Touhou 9. Based upon the "White Hare of Inaba" story of the Kojiki, she evolved into a yōkai from a rabbit due to her longevity. She is the leader of the earthly bunnies of the Eientei, despite her deceitful personality. She is also a lucky charm—humans who get lost in the forest can always depend on her fortune to find their way, though the humans often don't realize they could have used her fortune for greater things. On the scale of luckiness, hers is equivalent to a 40-leaf clover (compared with only a four-leaf clover).

Reisen Udongein Inaba (鈴仙・優曇華院・イナバ)Species: Moon rabbit
Ability: About enough power to manipulate insanity
Residence: EienteiStage 5 boss and playable character in Touhou 9, as well as 10.5, 12.3 and the Playstation 4 version of 14.5. A moon rabbit, she came to Gensokyo about 30 years ago to escape a war between the Earth and the Moon. Since then, she has been an apprentice to Eirin, a pet to Kaguya, and a caretaker to Tewi. She has the power to drive people mad with her eyes — mainly in the form of hallucinations — as well as communicate telepathically with her kind. She also has control over waves of all kinds, such as light waves, brainwaves, electromagnetic waves, as well as sound waves, demonstrated during her story in Phantasmagoria of Flower View. "Udongein" and "Inaba" are both nicknames, the first given her by Eirin and the second Kaguya; the latter is what Kaguya calls all rabbits. Despite her power over insanity, Reisen is portrayed as one of the most level-headed and serious characters in the series.According to a series of yonkoma comics approved by ZUN entitled Inaba of The Moon and Inaba of The Earth, despite the care she generally got, Reisen is often abused by her mistress Kaguya and teacher Eirin, mostly by knocking her out for a long time or subjecting her through 'punishment times'. She is also often the subject of many pranks made by Tewi.

Eirin Yagokoro (八意 永琳, Yagokoro Eirin)Species: Human (Lunarian)
Ability: About enough power to create any drug, natural genius
Residence: EienteiBoss of Final Stage A and midboss of Final Stage B. A genius pharmacist who once lived on the moon. Kaguya persuaded her to produce the forbidden Hourai Elixir—the elixir of life—and consumed it. They were found out, and Kaguya alone was punished and was sent to the Earth, a fact which Eirin always felt guilty about. Some time later, the moon court pardoned Kaguya's sins and summoned her back. Eirin and a handful of emissaries were sent to retrieve her, but Eirin found out that Kaguya didn't want to return to the moon. Acting out of her past guilt, Eirin betrayed and murdered all the other emissaries under the eyes of the earthlings who had fostered Kaguya. Eirin bribed the earthlings with the Hourai Elixir, in order to keep them silent, and went into hiding with Kaguya in Gensokyo. She is based on the Japanese goddess Omoikane.

Kaguya Houraisan (蓬莱山 輝夜, Hōraisan Kaguya)Species: Human (Lunarian)
Ability: About enough power to manipulate the eternity and the instantaneous
Residence: EienteiFinal boss of Imperishable Night, Kaguya is actually the Princess Kaguya from The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter. A princess of the moon, after consuming the forbidden Hourai Elixir and becoming immortal, she was punished by being exiled to live on the Earth. Later, she was pardoned and ordered to return to the moon. However, she preferred her common life on Earth to that as a princess on the moon. Eirin helped her escape the emissaries, and the two went into hiding in Gensokyo. Recently, she has been selling Yagokoro medicine and hosting exhibitions showing various items from the moon. In dōjinshi and fanworks, she is often portrayed as a NEET or unemployed slacker who lays around Eientei all day.

Fujiwara no Mokou (藤原 妹紅, Fujiwara no Mokō, alternate spelling Huziwara no Mokou)Species: Human
Ability: About enough power to manipulate fire and not die
Residence: Bamboo Forest of LostExtra Stage boss. Mokou was the daughter of a nobleman (assumed to be Fujiwara no Fuhito), one of Kaguya's suitors during her initial exile on Earth. When he was humiliated by Kaguya's impossible request, Mokou came to hate her. She wanted to take revenge, but Kaguya disappeared before she was able, so she consoled herself by stealing the Hourai Elixir that Eirin had bribed the other humans with, and drinking it to become immortal.No longer able to fit into human society, she lived as a wanderer and eventually found her way to Gensokyo. There, she was amazed to find that Kaguya was also a fugitive. The two still detest each other, killing one another and reincarnating in a daily ritual. However, Mokou is ecstatic that her eternal enemy is a fugitive like her, and that one who can never die is not such an unspeakable abomination in Gensokyo (though she still leads a solitary life.) Indeed, she has found her paradise. Mokou is able to reincarnate indefinitely, even if her body is destroyed — though she still feels pain. She has control over the flames of the phoenix.


=== Phantasmagoria of Flower View ===

Aya Shameimaru (射命丸 文, Shameimaru Aya, alternate spelling Aya Syameimaru)Species: Crow tengu
Ability: About enough power to manipulate wind
Residence: Yōkai MountainPlayable character in Touhou 9, main character of Touhou 9.5 (the first one to be the sole main character of a Touhou game other than Reimu), main character of the fanbook Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red, stage 4 boss in Touhou 10, and playable character in Touhou 10.5, as well as 12.3 and 16. Aya is a reporter and photographer who runs Gensokyo's one-woman newspaper, the Bunbunmaru Shinbun. She has a serious character, at odds with her reporting; she loves rumors and her newspaper is filled with gossip about the girls of Gensokyo, sometimes on the verge of being a tabloid. To Reimu's irritation, however, she rejects the stories of a certain miko saving Gensokyo as unverifiable. Not one to show off, she rarely fights of her own volition, though she has contempt for those she thinks are weak. As a tengu, she has power over the wind and is the most skilled flier in all of Gensokyo. Her bullets are extremely fast compared to most.

Medicine Melancholy (メディスン・メランコリー, Medisun Merankorī, alternate spelling Medicin Melancory)Species: Doll
Ability: About enough power to manipulate poison
Residence: Nameless HillAn abandoned doll who turned into a yōkai after years of exposure to the poisonous lily-of-the-valleys. She advocates for doll emancipation (despite the fact that she is the only one capable of free will) and dislikes humans because of their manipulation of dolls. For this, Sikieiki judged her to be "too narrow in outlook." Perhaps affected by this statement, she made friends with Eirin Yagokoro, though she still wishes for the liberation of dolls. Her name may originate from A Medicine for Melancholy by Ray Bradbury. In addition to her attacks, she also spews poisonous mists on the battlefield, slowing the player's movement when the player comes in contact with the mists.

Yuuka Kazami (風見 幽香, Kazami Yūka, alternate spelling Yuka Kazami)Species: Yōkai
Ability: About enough power to manipulate flowers
Residence: Garden of the SunReturning from Lotus Land Story, she is the second PC-98 character to appear in the Windows Touhou games, after Alice Margatroid. She loves seasonal flowers, so throughout the year she moves to the respective places where the flowers grow. She has lived long enough to witness several major flower-blooming outbreaks, an event that only occurs once every sixty years, leading Sikieiki to comment that she "had lived a little too long." Similar to the PC-98 Yuka, she is the slowest playable character in the game. In her conversation with Tewi Inaba, it is said that her umbrella is the only flower in Gensokyo that never wilts.

Komachi Onozuka (小野塚 小町, Onozuka Komachi, alternate spelling Komachi Onoduka)Species: Shinigami
Ability: About enough power to manipulate distance
Residence: Sanzu RiverA shinigami who provides passage across the Sanzu River, Komachi has a role akin to that of Charon of Greek mythology. Despite her rather important job, she doesn't always take it seriously and ends up being scolded by her boss, Sikieiki Yamaxanadu. Her name is thought to have originated from the famed beauty Ono no Komachi. Her attacks come in the form of holed coins, in reference to the "price" one needs to pay to cross the Sanzu River. She re-appears as a playable character in Touhou 10.5 and 12.3.

Shikieiki Yamaxanadu (四季映姫・ヤマザナドゥ, Shikieiki Yamazanadu, alternate spelling Sikieiki Yamaxanadu)Species: Yama
Ability: About enough power to judge clearly as good and evil
Residence: HiganFinal boss of the game, Sikieiki is one of the judges of the underworld. It is her job to judge the deceased and decide whether they get sent to Heaven or Hell, or somewhere else. As a part of her job, she can be rather moralistic and would go on and on in her lectures on morals. "Siki Eiki" is her real name; the "Yamaxanadu" part of her name is actually her title, a combination of her status as "Yama" and "Xanadu", the place she is in charge of. "Yama" means that she is a judge of the underworld, and "Xanadu" means paradise.


=== Mountain of Faith ===

Shizuha Aki (秋 静葉, Aki Shizuha, alternate spelling Sizuha Aki)Species: God of red leaves (Kami)
Ability: About enough power to govern autumn leaves
Residence: Foot of the Yōkai MountainStage 1 midboss. She and her younger sister Minoriko control the season of autumn together. Of the opinion that red leaves are the best part of autumn, she feels tremendously proud when showing the beauty of her leaves to Minoriko. Disappears when winter comes.

Minoriko Aki (秋 穣子, Aki Minoriko)Species: God of abundance (Kami)
Ability: About enough power to govern abundant harvest
Residence: Foot of the Yōkai MountainStage 1 boss and the younger sister of Shizuha. As a harvest goddess, she is invited as a special guest to the harvest festival in the Human Village every year. If she isn't invited then a good harvest cannot be guaranteed for that year. The fragrance of the harvest is her perfume, and with it, she feels superior to her elder sister . Like her sister, she disappears when winter comes.

Hina Kagiyama (鍵山 雛, Kagiyama Hina)Species: Curse god (Kami)
Ability: About enough power to gather misfortune
Residence: Yōkai Sea of TreesStage 2 boss. Hina is the head of the Nagashihina army, where Nagashihina refers to the dolls being drifted down the river in a ritual to cast away one's sins and misfortunes. As such, Hina is surrounded by curses and those who encounter her will run into misfortune. Despite this, Hina has good intentions and does not wish to have misfortune befall humans again. She is often spinning and her attacks are characterized as spirals.

Nitori Kawashiro (河城 にとり, Kawashiro Nitori, alternate spelling Nitori Kawasiro)Species: Kappa
Ability: About enough power to manipulate water
Residence: Untrodden ValleyStage 3 boss and playable character in Touhou 11 (teamed with Marisa), 13.5 and 14.5. An engineer with an interest in humans, she believes that the kappa and the humans were ancient allies. The kappa of the Touhou universe are described as a race with advanced technology, demonstrated when the shy Nitori uses optical camouflage to conceal herself from the humans. As an engineer, she likes to take things apart and reassemble them again, so her clothes are packed with tools for this purpose.

Momiji Inubashiri (犬走 椛, Inubashiri Momiji, alternate spelling Momizi Inubashiri)Species: White wolf tengu
Ability: About enough power to see a thousand ri ahead
Residence: Waterfall of Nine HeavensStage 4 midboss. A loyal tengu who patrols the Yōkai Mountain and can see great distances. She attempts to scare intruders off with simple attacks before reporting them to her superiors. When not on duty, she plays dai shogi with the kappa who live nearby. During the events of Mountain of Faith, she failed to scare Reimu and Marisa away, so she was assigned under Aya Syameimaru to continue surveillance on the intruders. Her report led to the peaceful resolution of the tension between the tengu and the Moriya Shrine.

Sanae Kochiya (東風谷 早苗, Kochiya Sanae, alternate spelling Sanae Kotiya)Species: Human
Ability: About enough power to cause miracles
Residence: Moriya ShrineStage 5 boss and priestess (miko) of the Moriya Shrine. Though she is human, she is Suwako's descendant and has the power to create miracles due to her divine blood. In the past, people began to worship her as a living god due to these miracles, despite the fact that she was the priestess of another god and most of the miracles were her god's. As the outside world changed, though, faith in both Sanae and her god Kanako declined and they chose to move their shrine to Gensokyo. Wanting to gather the faith of Gensokyo's residents, she threatened to close down the Hakurei Shrine, which resulted in a resounding defeat for her and her gods. It was then she understood that she is no longer a living god in this land of miracles, but only a normal human being.

Kanako Yasaka (八坂 神奈子, Yasaka Kanako)Species: God of wind and rain (Kami)
Ability: About enough power to create qian
Residence: Wind God's LakeStage 6 boss. Officially, a goddess of mountain who inhabits the Moriya Shrine. But in reality goddess of wind and rain. she is based on the Japanese god Yasakatome no Mikoto. As faith in gods in the outside world declined, she decided to move the Moriya Shrine to Gensokyo's Yōkai Mountain, rather than simply be forgotten and fade away. She quickly acquired faith from the yōkai on the mountain — though some would just call it friendship. To acquire the faith of the humans and yōkai living elsewhere in Gensokyo as well, she sent her priestess Sanae to the Hakurei Shrine. She wears a snake-patterned shimenawa as her trademark, symbolizing her victory over Suwako long ago, in addition to removable pillars on her back. In the events before Touhou 11, she was the one that sent the Yatagarasu to Utsuho Reiuzi so Kanako and Suwako could start their Mountain Industrial Revolution project using nuclear fusion power with the kappa. The project was a complete success.

Suwako Moriya (洩矢 諏訪子, Moriya Suwako)Species: God of mountains (Kami)
Ability: About enough power to create kun
Residence: Moriya ShrineExtra Stage boss, a girl with a frog motif. She is the true goddess of the Moriya Shrine, and was once the leader of Mishaguji, but was later defeated by Kanako. However, the people of her kingdom still feared Mishaguji and were unable to accept Kanako as their new goddess. The two created a false god, "Moriya", from which they could both gather faith. And thus Kanako borrowed Suwako's powers, and silently ruled as the goddess of mountain. Already long forgotten in the outside world, Suwako was untroubled as her faith slowly declined, but accompanied Kanako to Gensokyo nonetheless — despite their history, and their frequent disagreements, the two are good friends. She and Cirno are seen to be enemies, as Cirno freezes frogs, much to Suwako's annoyance.


=== Scarlet Weather Rhapsody ===

Iku Nagae (永江 衣玖, Nagae Iku)Species: Yōkai oarfish
Ability: About enough power to read the atmosphere
Residence: Sea of Abstruse CloudsSub-boss of Scarlet Weather Rhapsody. An ambassador from the Dragon Palace who came to warn Gensokyo of an upcoming calamity. She is a lightning user, and most of her combat abilities center around lightning and her long scarf.

Tenshi Hinanawi (比那名居 天子, Hinanai Tenshi, alternate spelling Tenshi Hinanai)Species: Celestial
Ability: About enough power to manipulate the earth
Residence: Bhava-agra (Naivasaṃjñānāsaṃjñāyatana)Boss of Scarlet Weather Rhapsody. A girl who, through no virtue of her own, ascended to Heaven with her family. Having lived a sheltered life in Heaven, she became selfish and arrogant. Bored with her life in Heaven and envious of yōkai creating incidents on earth, she decides to create an incident in Gensokyo by using her powers, along with stealing the Hisou-no-Tsurugi ("Scarlet Disposition Sword"), which has the ability to excrete the disposition of others in the form of a mist, manipulating the weather. She is adept at the manipulation of rock and earth: she can throw rocks like a projectile, and raise the earth around or in front of herself.


=== Subterranean Animism ===

Kisume (キスメ)Species: Tsurube-otoshi
Ability: About enough power to dropping onibi
Residence: Fantasy Wind CaveStage 1 midboss. A bashful yōkai who likes confined spaces, and suddenly drops from high places to attack. She appears in a well bucket and it is assumed she rarely, if ever, leaves this.

Yamame Kurodani (黒谷ヤマメ, Kurodani Yamame)Species: Tsuchigumo
Ability: About enough power to manipulate illness
Residence: Fantasy Wind CaveStage 1 boss. A cave-dwelling spider yōkai who has a cheerful and combative personality despite her despised ability. She rarely uses her ability, unless needed. Her design resembles a spider, in that the shape of her dress resembles the shape of a spider and her buttons look like an extra three pairs of eyes.

Parsee Mizuhashi (水橋パルスィ, Mizuhashi Parusi, alternate spelling Parsee Mizuhasi)Species: Hashihime
Ability: About enough power to manipulate jealousy
Residence: Deep Road to HellStage 2 boss. A bridge princess who lives on the route to Former Hell. Her ability puts in her in a state of permanent jealousy (her eyes being drawn green because of this). While she appears friendly to the player, she apparently spoke ill of them once they left.

Yuugi Hoshiguma (星熊 勇儀, Hoshiguma Yūgi, alternate spelling Yugi Hoshiguma)Species: Oni
Ability: About enough power to have supernatural things, unnatural phenomena, spirits and demons
Residence: Former Streets of Hell (Ancient City)Stage 3 boss. One of the "Four Devas of the Mountain" along with Suika Ibuki, she is referred to as "Yugi the Powerful" within the four. Originally from the Yōkai Mountain, she and the other oni moved underground when humans began to shun the oni. Yugi continues her cheerful sake-drinking life in the Ancient City of Former Hell.

Satori Komeiji (古明地 さとり, Komeiji Satori)Species: Satori
Ability: About enough power to read minds
Residence: Palace of the Earth SpiritsStage 4 boss. Satori is the Mistress of the Palace of the Earth Spirits after the underground city was separate from Hell. Her ability to read "minds" makes various yōkai and spirits fearful of her, while leaving her well loved by the animals that normally can't be understood. With these animals as pets, she manages the ruin of inferno where her home stands. During the events of the Subterranean Animism the Heroine (from above ground) invaded her home. After an encounter, she permitted the Heroine passage towards the Hell of Blazing Fires to ask her pets about their supposed problem.

Rin Kaenbyou (火焔猫 燐, Kaenbyō Rin)Species: Kasha
Ability: About enough power to carry off corpses
Residence: Remains of the Blazing HellA two-tailed cat who shows up as a midboss in stage 4 and 5, and turns into humanoid form when she is being the stage 5 boss and Final Stage midboss. Rin (nicknamed Orin in the game) is one of Satori's pets, whose job is to carry corpses to the former Hell of Blazing Fires to regulate its heat. Before the events of Subterranean Animism, Rin learned of her old friend Utsuho's newly acquired power, and of her plans to conquer the above ground. She got terrified at the thought of her friend's future, and the punishment her mistress would impart on her (even though Satori would actually never have, and it was just Rin's thinking on her side). She decided to drive the evil spirits to above ground to lure the yōkai in and get them to help her, but instead a human appears before her. Upon seeing that human is unexpectedly strong, though, she asks her to help Utsuho.

Utsuho Reiuji (霊烏路 空, Reiuji Utsuho, alternate spelling Utuho Reiuzi)Species: Hell raven with Yatagarasu
Ability: About enough power to manipulate nuclear fusion
Residence: Deepest sector of the Underground CityFinal Stage boss. Utsuho (sometimes Okuu) is one of Satori's pets, a Hell raven who has lived in the underground world since before it was separated from Hell. Her job is to regulate the flames of the Hell of Blazing Fires. Before the events of Subterranean Animism, she was told by a voice (presumably Kanako Yasaka's) that she could swallow the god, yatagarasu, that was hidden in the flames to gain a power that would fulfill the wishes of both the worlds below and above the surface. This power was nuclear fusion. Utsuho went mad with the abilities she had gained, and decided that, using these powers, she would take over Gensokyo. Her friend, Rin Kaenbyou, became worried about Utsuho, and drove evil spirits to the surface to cause an incident among the strong yōkai above ground, in hope that they would come down to do something about it and, when they got there, defeat Utsuho and bring her back to her former self. What came, however, was not a strong yōkai, but a strong human.She is sometimes called ⑥ (an inverted ⑨) because she seems to have a simple and boastful personality, and is called a birdbrain by Orin. Also, she is often considered an idiot by fans. ZUN also indirectly calls her an idiot in her theme song's description. This leads to comparisons (or pairings) with Cirno.

Koishi Komeiji (古明地 こいし, Komeiji Koishi)Species: Satori
Ability: About enough power to manipulate the unconscious
Residence: Moriya ShrineExtra Stage boss. Like her elder sister Satori, she was born with the power to read other people's minds. However, Koishi knew this power of hers would make people feel uneasy around her, so she deliberately closed off this power (which dulled Satori's power as well). She sealed away her own mind to others in doing so, and even her sister would not be able to read her mind. Satori took pity on her, and gave some pets to Koishi, hoping that the animals would open Koishi's heart to others. The plan worked, and Koishi started to care for her pets, and would one day set out to seek the god who gave Utsuho that power so that her own pets could use it too.


=== Undefined Fantastic Object ===

Nazrin (ナズーリン, Nazūrin, alternate spelling Nazlin)Species: Mouse yōkai
Ability: About enough power to find sought-for objects
Residence: The Road of Lingering Snow (Stage 1), Makai (Stage 5)Stage 1 boss and stage 5 mid-boss. Being a leader of mice and a natural dowser, Nazrin was commanded by Syou to search for the shards that fell from the sky and the Jeweled Pagoda of Bishamonten, but her dowsing rods brought her to the humans instead.

Kogasa Tatara (多々良 小傘, Tatara Kogasa)Species: Kasa-obake
Ability: About enough power to surprise humans
Residence: Skies of Gensokyo (Undefined Fantastic Object), Myouren Temple Graveyard (Ten Desires)Stage 2 boss and extra stage mid-boss of Undefined Fantastic Object and stage 3 mid-boss of Ten Desires. Kogasa was once an umbrella who was forgotten for a long time and thus became an obake. Being bored and lonely, she tries to perfect the art of scaring humans. One of Kogasa's notable traits is heterochromia, her right eye is blue but her left eye is red.

Ichirin Kumoi (雲居 一輪, Kumoi Ichirin) and Unzan (雲山)Species: Yōkai and Nyūdo
Ability: About enough power to use nyūdō, ability to change shape at will
Residence: Palanquin ShipIchirin is a former human turned nyuudou user that the heroine encounters on their arrival at the Palanquin Ship. Along with Unzan, she guards the Palanquin Ship of her own accord in order to assist in the revival of Byakuren Hiziri. Unzan is an old nyuudou, whose gender is male, controlled by Ichirin Kumoi. Being a cloud spirit, Unzan's true form is a mystery. They both work together as a duo.

Minamitsu Murasa (村紗 水蜜, Murasa Minamitsu, alternate spelling Minamitu Murasa)Species: Ship ghost
Ability: About enough power to cause shipwrecks
Residence: Inside the Palanquin ShipMurasa is the stage 4 boss, who is the spirit of a human who fell off a ship and drowned in the past. As the humans feared her, their fears turned her into a yōkai. She pledged herself to saving Byakuren, riding the ship she created.

Syou Toramaru (寅丸 星, Toramaru Shō, alternate spelling Shou Toramaru)Species: Tiger yōkai
Ability: About enough power to gather treasures
Residence: Formerly Makai (Above Hokkai), currently Myouren Temple.Syou is the stage 5 boss, representing good fortune and an avatar of Bishamonten. She was chosen by Byakuren to have the mountain yōkai gather faith in exchange. When Byakuren disappeared after a few hundred years, the temple was in great disarray, and all of her friends who were sealed into the Earth returned. Syou, not wanting to run away or have any regrets, told Murasa and the others how to lift the seal.

Byakuren Hijiri (聖 白蓮, Hijiri Byakuren, alternate spelling Byakuren Hiziri)Species: Magician, formerly human
Ability: About enough power to use magic
Residence: Formerly Hokkai, currently Myouren Temple.Byakuren is the stage 6 boss. She had a younger brother, Myouren Hiziri, who taught her Buddhist magic, but died earlier than her. This made Byakuren fear death greatly, and she obtained the power to regain her youth. However, it was considered Black Magic rather than an art of Buddhism. Ichirin was her servant, while Murasa pledged herself to saving Byakuren. Fans think Byakuren is a thief-type like Marisa because of near duplication of spell cards used in previous Touhou games and completely copying Shinki's penultimate attack.

Nue Houjuu (封獣 ぬえ, Hōjū Nue)Species: Nue
Ability: About enough power to make her true form unknown
Residence: The Night Sky of GensokyoNue is the extra stage boss, also appearing as a sphere of light in stages 4 and 6. She is a very mysterious yōkai who flies through the night sky. Despite being non-human, she was defeated by humans many times in the past, but the accounts of her appearance vary. However, those were all made up, because her form is never seen to anybody but herself. She merely enjoys frightening humans and their imagining of strange things from afar.


=== Touhou Hisōtensoku ===

Master Big Catfish (大ナマズ様, Ō Namazu-sama)Species: Namazu
Ability: Earthquake manipulation, Shape shifting
Residence: Hong Meirin's DreamFinal Boss in Hong Meirin's scenario. It is the villainous avatar of Taisui Xingjun, a God of Calamity, who, in a dream Hong Meirin has, sends assassins (disguised as familiar characters) to attack her. Its objective as it claims is to drain her of her power so that it can move the Earth and return to this world once again. It also speaks quite strongly of its plans to cause various disasters to Gensokyo.According to NKZ's comment in the Nae Raji (radio broadcasting by D.N.A. Softwares) on September 21, 2009, the inspiration of the Giant Catfish is the Golden Statue of Catfish at Yoshikawa City in Saitama Prefecture, which is NKZ's hometown.


=== Double Spoiler ===

Hatate Himekaidou (姫海棠　はたて, Himekaidō Hatate)Species: Crow tengu
Ability: About enough power to use thoughtography
Residence: Yōkai MountainBoss of Level Spoiler and a player character. Hatate is a modern tengu reporter who makes a newspaper called Kakashi Nenpo. Unlike Aya, she never goes outside for her newspaper research, but instead uses her ability called "spirit photography" to get information from other newspapers. After reading Aya's Bunbunmaru Shinbun newspaper, she decided to observe Aya's way of gathering material for her articles.


=== Fairy Wars ===
Fairy Wars does not introduce any new characters, but three characters from the manga Eastern and Little Nature Deity and Strange and Bright Nature Deity do appear.

Sunny Milk (サニーミルク, Sanīmiruku, alternate spelling Sunnymilk)Species: Fairy
Ability: About enough power to refract light
Residence: Forest of MagicA cheerful fairy who likes to play pranks, often called "Sunny" by her accomplices. She manipulates the power of the sun, namely the power to control reflection, with which can make things appear to be invisible. She considers herself the smartest of the three, though she fails often. She is from the manga Eastern and Little Nature Deity and Strange and Bright Nature Deity.

Luna Child (ルナチャイルド, Runachairudo, alternate spelling Lunarchild)Species: Fairy
Ability: About enough power to silence sound
Residence: Forest of MagicA fairy who likes to play pranks, often called "Luna" by her accomplices. Her power comes from the moon, and she can use it to silence the sounds around her. She seems to be the most cruel of the three. She is from the manga Eastern and Little Nature Deity and Strange and Bright Nature Deity.

Star Sapphire (スターサファイア, Sutāsafaia, alternate spelling Starsaphire)Species: Fairy
Ability: About enough power to detect moving things
Residence: Forest of MagicA fairy who likes to play pranks, often called "Star" by her accomplices and "Saphi" by the fans. Unlike the other two, her power does not wax and wane with the time of day. In reality, she seems to be the smartest of the three, and often escapes punishment while the other two are caught. She is from the manga Eastern and Little Nature Deity and Strange and Bright Nature Deity.


=== Ten Desires ===

Kyouko Kasodani (幽谷 響子, Kasodani Kyōko)Species: Yamabiko
Ability: About enough power to reflect sound
Residence: Myouren TempleStage 2 boss. Kyouko Kasodani is a yokai that embodies mountain echoes and is able to reflect sound waves. She appears to be a recent newcomer to Myouren Temple, though no reference is made to the characters already living there; with mountain echoes no longer being seen as strange, she decided to enter the Buddhist discipline. She seems to be responsible for cleaning duties and confronting trespassers.

Yoshika Miyako (宮古 芳香, Miyako Yoshika)Species: Jiangshi
Ability: About enough power to eat anything
Residence: Myouren Temple GraveyardStage 3 and Stage 4 boss, alongside Seiga Kaku. Yoshika Miyako is a dimwitted but loyal jiang shi who guards the entrance to the Divine Spirit Mausoleum for Seiga Kaku. As she is just a zombie, she lacks the flexibility and dexterity of living humans and can hardly carry a conversation since most of her brain has rotted away.

Seiga Kaku (霍 青娥, Kaku Seiga)Species: Hermit
Ability: About enough power to pass through walls
Residence: Myouren Temple GraveyardStage 4 boss, alongside Yoshika Miyako. Seiga Kaku is a hermit who once, she was in awe of the Tao. Usually guards the Divine Spirit Mausoleum from invaders, she can use her powers to pass through walls. She is very strict to her employee Yoshika.

Soga no Toziko (蘇我 屠自古, Soga no Tojiko, alternate spelling Soga no Tojiko)Species: Ghost
Ability: About enough power to manipulate lightning
Residence: Hall of Dreams' Great MausoleumStage 5 midboss. One of Toyosatomimi no Miko's servants. Soga no Tojiko is a ghost who came from the powerful Soga clan. She served Miko alongside Futo, but she denied resurrection as a human due to her previous connections with Futo; instead, became a vengeful spirit who guards the Mausoleum. She has a powerful ability to control thunder and lightning.

Mononobe no Futo (物部 布都, Mononobe no Futo)Species: Human Taoist
Ability: About enough power to use feng shui
Residence: Hall of Dreams' Great MausoleumStage 5 boss. One of Toyosatomimi no Miko's servants. Mononobe no Futo is a human who came from the Mononobe clan, serving Toyosatomimi throughout the years alongside Soga no Tojiko. She has the power to control feng shui and summon a boat during some of her spellcards.

Toyosatomimi no Miko (豊聡耳 神子, Toyosatomimi no Miko)Species: Saint
Ability: About enough power to listen to ten people speaking at the same time
Residence: Divine Spirit MausoleumStage 6 boss. A Saint living inside the Hall of Dreams' Mausoleum. She is once born in a stable and was recognized as a genius at an early age before she became a saint. Very knowledgeable, she has the ability to listen to ten people speaking at the same time. She is based on Prince Shotoku. After the events of Ten Desires, she and her followers moved to a world named Senkai that is said to be suited for hermits.

Mamizou Futatsuiwa (二ツ岩 マミゾウ, Futatsuiwa Mamizō, alternate spelling Mamizou Hutatsuiwa)Species: Tanuki
Ability: About enough power to disguise things and herself
Residence: Myouren TempleExtra stage boss. A Tanuki yokai who is making her home in the Myouren Temple. Usually she likes to pull tricks to people and has an ability to change appearances, making her similar to Nue.


=== Hopeless Masquerade ===

Hata no Kokoro (秦 こころ)Species: Menreiki
Ability: Ability to manipulate emotion
Residence: Unknown, only seen in the Human Village during the Final Stage.Stage 7 Boss. A Menreiki who was born from the 66 masks that belonged to Hata no Kawakatsu. When one of the masks, the Mask of Hope was lost, it caused the humans to lose all hope and she decided to search for it, but it went in vain. She's a lifeless and emotionally devoid person, and she had to rely on her masks to properly express her emotions. All of her masks are in harmony with one another, but when she lost the Mask of Hope, it caused a severe imbalance and as such, she went berserk.


=== Double Dealing Character ===

Wakasagihime (わかさぎ姫)Species: Mermaid
Ability: About enough power to increase her strength in water
Residence: Misty LakeStage 1 Boss. Wakasagihime is a Mermaid yokai who lives in Misty Lake. Though normally quiet, She attacks the heroines and announces the new reign of yokai before being defeated.

Sekibanki (赤蛮奇)Species: Rokurokubi
Ability: About enough power to make her head fly
Residence: Human VillageStage 2 Boss. A Rokurokubi who has the ability to make her head fly. Seen rampaging through the Human Village, she is defeated by the heroines.

Kagerou Imaizumi (今泉 影狼, Imaizumi Kagerou)Species: Werewolf
Ability: About enough power to transform into a wolf on the night of the full moon
Residence: Bamboo Forest of the LostStage 3 Boss. A Werewolf who has the ability to turn into a wolf during the full moon. Seen in the Bamboo Forest of the Lost causing havoc, she is easily defeated by the heroines and admits that she isn't acting on her own will.Tsukumo SistersSpecies: Tsukumogami
Ability: About enough power to make sounds and performing on their own
Residence: Storm in the Skies of GensokyoBoth Benben and Yatsuhashi Tsukumo were once merely an instrument used by others in the Outside World, but eventually they came to Gensokyo. When the Miracle Mallet was used, its magical power flooded into them, and they both became tsukumogami at around the same time. However, they quickly learned where their power was coming from (the Shining Needle Castle) and decided to overthrow society as tools, like Seija Kijin did as well.

Benben Tsukumo (九十九 弁々, Tsukumo Benben)
Stage 4A Boss and Stage 4B Midboss. She is a calm hearted Tsukumogami and Yatsuhashi's sister, who contrasts with her sister's hot blooded personality. Present on guarding the upside-down castle floating in the sky, she used it as a source of her powers. She wields a Biwa to summon attacks.

Yatsuhashi Tsukumo (九十九 八橋, Tsukumo Yatsuhashi)
Stage 4B Boss and Stage 4A Midboss. She is a hot blooded Tsukumogami  and Benben's sister, who contrasts with her sister's calm hearted personality. Present on guarding the upside-down castle floating in the sky, she used it as a source of her powers. She uses her dress as a Koto to summon attacks.

Seija Kijin (鬼人 正邪, Kijin Seija)Species: Amanojaku
Ability: About enough power to turn anything over
Residence: Shining Needle CastleStage 5 Boss. An Ama-No-Jaku who guards the Shining Needle Castle and plots rebellion against the Humans. She never listens to everyone's orders and is usually disliked by humans due to her ability to turn anything over.

Shinmyoumaru Sukuna (少名 針妙丸, Sukuna Shinmyoumaru)Species: Issun-bōshi
Ability: About enough power to use the Lucky Mallet
Residence: Shining Needle CastleStage 6 Boss. A descendant of the Issun-Boushi, who once defeated an Oni and claimed its treasure called the Lucky Mallet, which has an ability to make everything big. Its power is used to create the Shining Needle Castle, but the due to the powers of the Oni, it caused the castle to sink to the Oni's world taking along the kobito race with it. After the incident, the tool was sealed, only to be unlocked by Sukuna who's being used by Seija for her selfish desires and that caused the Yokai to revolt.

Raiko Horikawa (堀川 雷鼓, Horikawa Raiko)Species: Tsukumogami
Ability: About enough power to ride any rhythm
Residence: Storm in the Skies of GensokyoExtra Stage Boss. A Tsukumogami made from a Taiko drum who wished to make a paradise for tools. During the events of the game, she was influenced by the power of the Lucky Mallet and did malicious things, only to throw away her drums and to sought a new power to eradicate the Oni's influence.


=== Urban Legend in Limbo ===

Kasen Ibaraki (茨木 華扇, Ibaraki Kasen)Species: Sennin (Possibly)
Ability: Understanding what birds say, crushing onryou, instant movement, using animals, remote control of artificial arms, connecting separate spaces, guiding and transfiguring yokai, hiding her home using fangshu, creating and controlling light orbs
Residence: Seen at the Hakurei Shrine and the Human VillagePlayable character in the game. She is a  mysterious girl who describes herself as "a simple pilgrim" and shows up at the Hakurei Shrine looking for the so-called "arm of the kappa." She is introduced in her name panel as "the one-armed, horned hermit," so it is safe to assume she is a hermit. During the second chapter, she is shown as able to destroy evil spirits with her bandaged arm. However, because she supposedly has horns and her left wrist has a shackle, it might also be safe to assume that she is an Oni (ZUN once stated that for him, horns and shackles are the mark of Oni). According to ZUN, she was one of the possible Extra Stage boss of Ten Desires, along with Byakuren Hijiri. She is also mentioned in the game's fourth ending, explaining that Marisa heard from Kasen that the ultimate goal of Taoism is to achieve immortality.

Sumireko Usami (宇佐見 菫子, Usami Sumireko)Species: Human
Ability: Psychic Powers; telekinesis, pyrokinesis, psychokinesis, levitation, hydrokinesis, astral projection
Residence: Outside WorldThe game's final boss. She is a human who possesses psychic powers. She utilises various items such as Tarot Cards. Her intelligence earned her a spot at a rather prestigious prep school. Due to her abilities, she is interested in occult phenomena, psychic powers and urban legends, and seeks to learn more about her condition. When she entered high school, she formed a occult organization known as the "Secret Sealing Club", although originally a measure to scare away admirers, later dedicated to exposing the secrets of the world. That led her to discover Gensokyo. After obtaining Power Stones, taken from various spots filled with occult energy, visiting Gensokyo would become a habit. Not realising that she was putting Gensokyo at risk, she was repeatedly destroying the Barrier in order to pass over, which was a primary concern for the inhabitants. After being truly defeated, Sumireko befriended the people of Gensokyo. She eventually realised she was a pawn in someone else's plans, and the activated Power Stone that was snuck in alongside the rest she had collected would cause another Incident. Ever since, while dreaming, her soul would be able to visit Gensokyo.


=== Legacy of Lunatic Kingdom ===

Seiran (清蘭)Species: Moon rabbit
Ability: Firing bullets from other dimensions
Residence: Foot of yokai MountainStage 1 Boss. Seiran is a military infiltrator of the Lunarians and member of the "Eagle Ravi" squad. She usually communicates to her kin via telepathy and makes Mochi for her comrades.

Ringo (鈴瑚)Species: Moon rabbit
Ability: Becoming stronger by eating dango
Residence: yokai Mountain LakeStage 2 Boss. Ringo is an informant of the Lunarian military and member of the "Eagle Ravi" squad. Being laid back, she rarely fights her opponents until given permission.

Doremy Sweet (ドレミー・スイート, Doremī Suīto)Species: Baku
Ability: Eating and creating dreams
Residence: Secret PassagewayStage 3 Boss. Doremy Sweet is a Baku and the manager of the dream world who has the power to control, erase and create dreams. She guards the dream world herself for its order not to be disturbed.

Sagume Kishin (稀神サグメ, Kishin Sagume, alternate spelling Sagume Kisin)Species: Lunarian
Ability: Reversing situations with words
Residence: The Lunar CapitalStage 4 Boss. Sagume is a high-ranked Lunarian and goddess who has the power to reverse a situation with her words. This means that she always has to watch what she says.

Clownpiece (クラウンピース, Kuraunpīsu)Species: Fairy
Ability: Driving people to madness
Residence: Sea of TranquilityStage 5 Boss. Clownpiece is a Hell fairy and subordinate of Hecatia Lapislazuli. She has the power to drive someone to madness.

Junko (純狐)Species: Divine spirit
Ability: Total purification
Residence: Sea of Tranquility (Underside)Final Boss. Junko is the embodiment of all hatred towards the Lunarian race, especially Chang'e, whose husband shot down the sun and killed Junko's son. She is friends with Hecatia Lapislazuli who sympathized with her as she holds a grudge against Chang'e as well. Based on the Chinese mythological figure Chunhu (Junko is the Japanese reading of the same Chinese characters), who was one of the wives of Houyi, the sun-shooter.

Hecatia Lapislazuli (ヘカーティア・ラピスラズリ, Hekatiā Rapisurazuri)Species: Goddess
Ability: Having three bodies in a single mind
Residence: HellExtra Stage Boss. Hecatia Lapislazuli is a goddess who governs the Hells of the Earths, the Moons, and the Spirit Worlds. Like Junko, she also has a grudge against Chang'e, whose husband shot down Apollo and indirectly weakened Hell, as Hell wouldn't be able to exist without the sun. She's friends with Junko, and lent her Clownpiece, her subordinate, to fulfill her plans. Based on the Greek goddess Hecate.


=== Antinomy of Common Flowers ===

Joon Yorigami (依神 女苑, Yorigami Joon)Species: Pestilence God
Ability: Causing consumption of financial assetsPlayable character and final boss alongside Shion

Shion Yorigami (依神 紫苑, Yorigami Shion)Species: Poverty God
Ability: Capable of making people unlucky, including herselfPlayable character and final boss alongside Joon


=== Hidden Star in Four Seasons ===

Eternity Larva (エタニティラルバ, Etaniti Raruba)Species: Fairy
Ability: Scattering scalesStage 1 midboss and boss.

Nemuno Sakata (坂田 ネムノ, Sakata Nemuno)Species: Yama-uba
Ability: Making sanctuariesStage 2 midboss and boss.

Aunn Komano (高麗野 あうん, Komano Aun)Species: Komainu
Ability: Locating Shintoism and Buddhism
Residence: Hakurei ShrineStage 3 boss.  A komainu tasked with guarding the Hakurei shrine, typically doing so discreetly.  However, she allows herself to be revealed during the events of HSiFS, prompting the protagonists (even Reimu) to mistake her for a threat and attack her.

Narumi Yatadera (矢田寺 成美, Yatadera Narumi)Species: Magician (formerly Jizo statue)
Ability: Using magic (control of life)Stage 4 boss.  Brought to life by Mai Teireida as a test for the protagonist, but is defeated.  The player quickly thereafter finds a door in Narumi's back, which she uses to chase down Mai.

Mai Teireida (丁礼田 舞, Teireida Mai)Species: Human
Ability: Drawing out people's vitality by dancing behind themStage 5 boss (with Satono Nishida).  She is a servant of Okina Matara.

Satono Nishida (爾子田 里乃, Nishida Satono)Species: Human
Ability: Drawing out people's mental energy by dancing behind themStage 5 boss (with Mai Teireida).  She is a servant of Okina Matara.

Okina Matara (摩多羅 隠岐奈, Matara Okina)Species: Secret God
Ability: Creating doors on the backs of anything, controlling vitality and mental energyFinal stage and extra stage boss. She is a God and one of the Sages of Gensokyo, and the master of Satono Nishida and Mai Teireida.


=== Wily Beast and Weakest Creature ===

Eika Ebisu (戎 瓔花, Ebisu Eika)Species: Soul of a stillborn child
Ability: Capable of stacking stones wellStage 1 midboss and boss.

Urumi Ushizaki (牛崎 潤美, Ushizaki Urumi)Species: Ushi-oni
Ability: Capable of changing the weight of everyday objectsStage 2 midboss and boss.

Kutaka Niwatari (庭渡 久侘歌, Niwatari Kutaka)Species: God
Ability: Capable of healing throat illnessesStage 3 midboss and boss, Extra stage midboss. She first engages the protagonist to test her readiness to enter Hell, and later clashes with the protagonist again to keep her away from the danger posed by Saki's invasion.

Yachie Kicchou (吉弔 八千慧, Kicchou Yachie, alternate spelling Yachie Kitcho)}}Species: Jidiao
Ability: Capable of making people lose the will to fight backStage 4 midboss and boss. She masterminds the incident, by sending beast spirits to the Human Realm in search of a human who can help the beasts defeat Keiki.

Mayumi Joutouguu (杖刀偶 磨弓, Joutouguu Mayumi)Species: Haniwa
Ability: Capable of directly turning her loyalty into strengthStage 5 midboss and boss, and Stage 6 midboss. She is a servant of Keiki.

Keiki Haniyasushin (埴安神 袿姫, Haniyasushin Keiki)Species: God
Ability: Capable of creating idolsFinal boss. She is a god, borne from the piety of the oppressed human spirits that live as a slave species in the Beast World. Her army of Haniwa idols liberated the human spirits from the beast spirits, but the idols took control of the human spirits' habitat and the human spirits were thus enslaved again. Yachie started the incident in the hopes of crushing Keiki and her Haniwa idol army, which the beast spirits couldn't harm.

Saki Kurokoma (驪駒 早鬼, Kurokoma Saki)Species: Kurokoma
Ability: Capable of having unmatched leg strengthExtra stage boss. She wanted to capitalize on the chaos left in the wake of Keiki's defeat to extend her clan's influence across the Beast World and past Hell into the Human Realm.


== Other characters ==

Renko Usami (宇佐見 蓮子, Usami Renko)Species: Human
Ability: Telling the time by seeing the stars, determining her Residence by watching the moon
Residence: Kyoto, originally from TokyoRenko Usami is a physics student from Japan. She and Merry form the two-person occult circle, the Secret Seals Club, which investigates Gensokyo. She plays the role of skeptic, as Merry is the only one who's actually been inside Gensokyo, but sincerely believes Merry in the end. Although a normal human, with a glance of the sky, she is instantly able to determine her Residence and the current time to within a second; she has been described as "a human GPS." She is from the short stories that come with ZUN's music collections.

Maribel Hearn (マエリベリー・ハーン, Maeriberī Hān, alternate spelling Maribel Han)Species: Human
Ability: Seeing any boundary
Residence: Kyoto, originally from outside JapanMaribel Hearn (nicknamed Merry by Renko), is a psychology student and friend of Renko's. She and Renko form the two-person occult circle, the Secret Seals Club, which investigates Gensokyo. Descended from a long line of magicians, she is one of the few humans who can perceive and cross Gensokyo's boundaries. Unused to this ability, she tends to wander through by accident, thinks she is merely dreaming and gets herself into dangerous situations. She is from the short stories that come with ZUN's music collections. There has been no official romanization of her name, so her English name here is an approximation. She also appears strikingly similar to Yukari Yakumo, right down to the clothes they wear, leading people to believe they are connected somehow.

Rinnosuke Morichika (森近 霖之助, Morichika Rinnosuke)Species: Half-human half-yōkai
Ability: Ability to know the name and utility of any tool
Residence: KourindouRinnosuke (called Kourin by Marisa) is a half-human who runs an antique and collectibles shop known as Kourindou, which faces the forest of magic from the human village, in the space between the shrine, village, and forest. The journey from the village to the forest is of a preferable kind than other journeys. Starting with Muenzuka, Rinnosuke collected things from the outside world and the Netherworld, and handles all kinds of tools regardless of whether they are for human or yōkai use, which was indicated as a unique kind of shop, called by Rinnosuke himself as a "shop that sells found things." It also handles things from the outside world, like personal computers, digital cameras, and kitchen stoves, but all products displayed have no price attached to them making price negotiations necessary, and there are also many goods that are not up for sale from the start. It also handles miscellaneous daily items like teacups, and thus Remilia Scarlet and Sakuya Izayoi are frequent customers.He is the main character of Curiosities of Lotus Asia, and the only active humanoid male character in the Touhou series. He is also one of the few characters who seem to have no fighting ability. Despite his ability, he does not know how to use the unknown gadgets. Hence, he makes many false theories of his own about the foreign objects from the outside world. For example, he called a Game Boy a device that allows the user to control humans and possibly destroy the whole world. Later, Yukari corrects him that it is a device that allows the user to control imaginary humans and possibly destroy the whole imaginary world in any place. With few customers, other than some persistent loiterers like Reimu and Marisa, Rinnosuke spends most of his time pursuing his hobby of researching the world beyond Gensokyo. Much of his stock comes from the outside world, and he seems to have a close business relationship with Yukari, who procures the items for him.

Hieda no Akyuu (稗田 阿求, Hieda no Akyū, alternate spelling Hieda no Akyu)Species: Human
Ability: Not forgetting anything seen once
Residence: Human VillageShe is currently the "Child of Miare" (御阿礼の子, Miare no Ko) who was born in the Hieda family once in every few hundred years with ability to "not forget anything she sees" and records Gensokyo's history. She seems to like black tea. Despite her young age, her memory goes back 1,200 years. This is because every "Child of Miare" of the Hieda family is a reincarnation of previous "Child of Miare", who inherits the memories of the previous incarnates. She is the ninth reincarnation in the line, as reflected by her name — a pun of the Japanese word for "nine." Each time she reincarnates, her life span gets shorter and shorter. The "Miare" referred to is the real-life Hieda no Are, who compiled the Kojiki. Also, she is the first "Child of Miare" to be born after the sealing of Gensokyo. She is on the cover of Akyuu's Untouched Score, the original soundtracks for the PC-98 Touhou games, and is also the narrator of the book Perfect Memento of Strict Sense. It is possible that she may be a fellow scholar of Keine Kamishirasawa.

Watatsuki no Toyohime (綿月 豊姫)Species: Lunarian
Ability: Linking the Mountain and the Sea
Residence: Capital of the MoonOne of the princesses of the moon, she and her younger sister Yorihime are the leaders of the lunar emissaries—the same ones who were in charge of bringing Kaguya back to the moon. As such, their stance should be that of enmity toward Eirin, who betrayed the emissaries; however, as Eirin was once their respected tutor, they harbor no ill feelings toward the exiled Lunarians in Eientei. She is from the manga Silent Sinner in Blue. She is supposed to be the Japanese goddess Toyotama-hime, otherwise known as Otohime, the princess in the Urashima Taro legend.

Watatsuki no Yorihime (綿月 依姫)Species: Lunarian
Ability: Possession by the Gods
Residence: Capital of the MoonThe more serious counterpart to her elder sister Toyohime, and is also a princess of the moon. She seemed to absorb everything that Eirin said. Like Reimu, Yorihime can summon Japanese Gods to use their powers. She is from the manga Silent Sinner in Blue. She is based on the Japanese goddess Tamayori-hime.

Reisen (レイセン)Species: Moon rabbit
Residence: Capital of the MoonA moon rabbit (not related to Udonge) tasked to make the elixir of life for Chang'e, she got tired of her work and fled to Gensokyo with a lunar veil that allows her to take flight. She met Eirin Yagokoro, who gave her a letter to deliver to the two princesses on the moon. She is now a pet of the two princesses, who named her "Reisen" after their previous pet that fled to earth some time ago. She is from the manga Silent Sinner in Blue.

Kosuzu Motoori (本居 小鈴, Motoori Kosuzu)Species: Human
Ability: Deciphering books
Residence: Human VillageKosuzu is the owner of Suzunaan, a book renting store. She was introduced as the protagonist of Forbidden Scrollery.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Characters category on Touhou Wiki for more detailed information.