Title: Yakutsk Airport
Aspects: {'Yakutsk (disambiguation)'}

Platon Oyunsky Yakutsk International Airport (Yakut: Платон Ойуунускай аатынан аан дойдутааҕы Дьокуускай аэропорт, Platon Ojuunuskaj aatynan aan dojdutaaghy Coquusqay Aeroport IPA: [ɟoquːsˈqaj aeɾoˈpoɾt]; Russian: Международный аэропорт Якутск имени Платона Ойунского, Mezhdunarodnyj aeroport Yakutsk imeni Platona Ojunskogo) (IATA: YKS, ICAO: UEEE) is an airport in Yakutsk, Russia. It has one runway (an older runway serves as a parking area for disused aircraft) and has a capacity of 700 passengers per hour. The airport is the hub for five regional airlines, including Yakutia Airlines and Polar Airlines.
Construction of the airport started in 1931 and was used as a stopover on the ALSIB Alaska-Siberia air route for American planes flying to Europe during World War II. The present international terminal was built in 1996. The airport serves as a diversion airport on Polar route 4.Yakutsk has another, smaller airport at Magan, used by Boeing to test cold weather starting of its aircraft.


== Airlines and destinations ==


== Accidents and incidents ==
Before 1992, Aeroflot had monopoly on Soviet domestic flights, and had a lot of accidents. At least a dozen deadly accidents happened on or near Yakutsk. See Aeroflot accidents and incidents.

On 4 February 2010, Yakutia Airlines Flight 425, operated by Antonov An-24 RA-47360 suffered an engine failure on take-off for Olyokminsk Airport. During the subsequent landing, the nose and port main undercarriage were retracted, causing substantial damage to the aircraft.
On 10 October 2018, Flight 414, operated by a Sukhoi Superjet 100 RA-89011, rode out from a runway on landing at Yakutsk Airport from Ulan-Ude. During the subsequent landing, the behind chassis of the aircraft were broken. No one was killed in the crash, but four people were hospitalised.


== References ==


== External links ==
Article on Yakutsk Airport
Airport information for UEEE at World Aero Data. Data current as of October 2006.
Airport Yakutsk Aviateka.Handbook