Title: Calochortus elegans
Aspects: {'C. elegans elegans'}

Calochortus elegans is a species of flowering plant in the lily family known by the common name elegant Mariposa lily, cat's ear, elegant cat's ears or star tulip. It is native to the western United States from northern California to Montana.It is a perennial herb producing a slender, generally unbranched stem up to 15 centimeters in height. The basal leaf is 10 to 20 centimeters long and does not wither at flowering. The inflorescence bears 1 to 7 erect bell-shaped flowers. Each flower has three sepals and three petals with very hairy inner surfaces and edges. Each petal is greenish white in color with a purple crescent above a hairless patch at the base. The fruit is a winged capsule about 2 centimeters long.
VarietiesCalochortus elegans var. amoenus (Greene) auct.
Calochortus elegans var. amoenus hort.
Calochortus elegans var. elegans Pursh - Idaho, Oregon, Washington
Calochortus elegans var. lobbii Baker
Calochortus elegans var. major Hook.
Calochortus elegans var. minor Hook.
Calochortus elegans var. nanus Alph.Wood - Oregon, northern California
Calochortus elegans var. oreophilus Ownbey
Calochortus elegans var. selwayensis (H.St.John) Ownbey - Idaho, Montana
Calochortus elegans var. subclavatus Baker


== References ==

Calochortus elegans Hook.f. Bot. Mag. 98: t. 5976. 1872
Calochortus elegans Baker J. Linn. Soc., Bot. 14: 305. 1874 [1875 publ. 1874]
Calochortus elegans Pursh Fl. Amer. Sept. (Pursh) 1: 240. 1813 [Dec 1813]
Calochortus elegans Pursh Fl. Amer. Sept. (Pursh) 1: 240. 1813 [dt. 1814; issued Dec 1813]


== External links ==
 Media related to Calochortus elegans at Wikimedia Commons
Calflora Database: Calochortus elegans (Elegant mariposa lily,  Northwestern mariposa lily)
USDA Plants Profile for Calochortus elegans (elegant mariposa lily)
Jepson Manual eFlora (TJM2) treatment of Calochortus elegans
UC Photos gallery of Calochortus elegans
Calochortus elegans at eppo.int (EPPO code CCUEL)
Calochortus elegans at global names