Title: The D Las Vegas
Aspects: {'The D'}

The D Las Vegas Casino Hotel is a 34-story, 638-room hotel and casino in Downtown Las Vegas Nevada, owned and operated by Derek and Greg Stevens.
The D is located at the eastern end of the Fremont Street Experience. It has a 42,000-square-foot (3,900 m2) casino, several restaurants, a business center, and a pool. The casino now has more than 1,000 slot machines and 22 table games located on two floors.  It is the tallest building in downtown Las Vegas and the second-tallest inside the city limits, having been surpassed by Allure Las Vegas in 2007.
As Fitzgeralds, it had a "luck of the Irish" theme, with shamrocks and a leprechaun. In fall 2012, The D completed a property-wide renovation and rebranding to replace the Irish theme.


== History ==


=== Sundance Hotel (1980–1987) ===
The Sundance Hotel opened on July 2, 1980 on land owned by Moe Dalitz. Dalitz, an organized crime figure, faced difficulty from the Gaming Commission, so the casino was nominally run by his associates, Al Sachs and Herb Tobman, who also owned the Stardust and Fremont casinos.In 1983, Sachs and Tobman faced suspension of their gaming licenses due to charges of skimming. Dalitz applied to manage the Sundance himself, but the Gaming Commission stalled on his application, until July 1984, when he agreed to surrender management to Jackie Gaughan until the casino could be sold.


=== Fitzgeralds Hotel and Casino (1987–2012) ===

Finally, in 1987, the Sundance was sold to Lincoln Management Group (later Fitzgeralds Gaming) and renamed as Fitzgeralds Las Vegas.In December 2001, with Fitzgeralds Gaming in bankruptcy, The Majestic Star Casino, LLC, owned by Don Barden, bought the property, along with two other Fitzgeralds casinos in Colorado and Mississippi, for a total of $149 million. At that point, Barden became the first African American casino owner in Las Vegas. Barden separated Fitzgeralds Las Vegas from the Majestic Star umbrella two years later, to free it from restrictions imposed by the company's lenders.In May 2008, it was reported that Barden was pledging the property to generate a $35-million equity stake in a slots-only casino in Pittsburgh, making a sale likely for Fitzgeralds Las Vegas. It was subsequently reported, however, that Barden had no need to sell Fitzgeralds to maintain a stake in the slots-only casino in Pittsburgh and that it would remain an asset which he could use to generate cash for his struggling gambling portfolio.In October 2011, several months after Barden's death, his estate sold Fitzgeralds to brothers Derek and Greg Stevens, majority owners of the Golden Gate casino. Derek took a 78% ownership share, with 22% for Greg.


=== The D Las Vegas (2012–present) ===
The new owners completed a $22 million renovation and rebranding to become the D Las Vegas in Fall 2012. The letter D stands for "downtown", and also refers to Derek Stevens' nickname, and the Stevens' hometown of Detroit. The remodel gave the property a more modern feel, including the addition of dancing dealers in table games. The second-floor casino has a "Vintage Vegas" theme featuring the only operational Sigma Derby game in Las Vegas.The multimillion-dollar renovation upgraded all of the guest rooms and created luxury suites. The D also added a fine Italian steakhouse, Joe Vicari's Andiamo Italian Steakhouse, and opened the first American Coney Island outside of Michigan on the building's Fremont Street frontage. The property also features three distinct bars: Longbar, said to be the longest bar in Nevada at just fewer than 100 feet long; D Bar – a permanent outdoor bar on Fremont Street Experience featuring flair bartenders as well as dancing bartenders; and Vue Bar inside the second floor casino. The property's Fremont Street façade was enhanced with the addition of an exterior escalator and interactive video exhibition created by former Cirque du Soleil producer Roger Parent, which together feature more than 40 giant flat-screen monitors combined with hundreds of feet of LED signage. Parent is also responsible for the casino's interior escalator which uses LED technology and music depicting vintage imagery to transport guests to the vintage second-floor casino.In February 2017, The D added an exterior video wall promoted as the "World's Largest Keno Board", displaying a live feed of keno numbers as they're drawn inside the casino.
In 2013, the D expanded into hosting martial arts events as the venue hosted Lion Fight 11, a Muay Thai Tournament. The main event featured a match between Tetsuya Yamato, former WBC Muay Thai Japan Champion, and Kevin Ross, an American Muay Thai boxer. In addition, Lion Fight 11 was featured on AXS TV, a company founded by Mark Cuban.
In late 2013, the D became the first casino in the world to accept bitcoin for hotel rooms, restaurants, and gift shop items. Additionally, a bitcoin ATM was installed next to the gaming floor where customers can buy and sell bitcoin instantly for cash.


== References ==


== External links ==
The D Las Vegas