Title: Frédéric Alfred d'Erlanger
Aspects: {"D'Erlanger"}

Baron Frédéric Alfred d'Erlanger (29 May 1868 – 23 April 1943) was an Anglo-French composer, banker and patron of the arts. His father, Baron Frédéric Émile d'Erlanger, was a German head of a French banking house, his mother, Mathilde (née Slidell), was an American.One of four sons, d'Erlanger was born in Paris. He began his musical studies in Paris under Anselm Ehmant, his only teacher. His first work, a book of songs, was published when d'Erlanger was 20 years of age. Shortly afterwards, in 1886, he moved to London with his elder brother, Baron Emile Beaumont d'Erlanger, to work as a banker, for the private banking firm that his father owned. Both d'Erlanger and his brother became naturalised Englishmen. His compositions include works of all kinds, notably the operas Jehan de Saintré (Aix-les-Bains, 1 August 1893; Hamburg, 1894), Inès Menso (produced, under the pseudonym of Ferd. Regnal, in London at Covent Garden on 10 July 1897, and subsequently in Germany); Tess (after Thomas Hardy's Tess of the d'Urbervilles), produced at the Teatro di San Carlo, Naples, on 7 April 1906 and at Covent Garden on 14 July 1909, on both occasions under the baton of Ettore Panizza; and Noël, produced at the Paris Opéra-Comique on 28 December 1910.
In 1935 his ballet Les cents baisers, with a libretto by Boris Kochno, was produced by the Ballets Russes, choreographed by Bronislava Nijinska, with decor and costumes by Jean Hugo. His other works included a string quartet, a sonata for violin and pianoforte, an Andante symphonique for cello and orchestra, a quintet for pianoforte and strings, a Suite symphonique for orchestra (1895), a violin concerto, Op. 17, played by Fritz Kreisler at the Philharmonic Concert of 12 March 1903, and a Concerto symphonique for piano and orchestra (1921). One of his later works was a Requiem for solo voices, chorus and orchestra in 1931. Clearness of form and elegance of idea and expression are the distinguishing marks of d'Erlanger's music, whether in his operatic work, in his chamber and orchestral music, or in his songs.A millionaire, d'Erlanger was described as a "genuine Renaissance man"; he was a noted patron of the arts in London and invested in developing countries, financing department store chains in South America and railways in South Africa.D'Erlanger was a founding member of the Oxford and Cambridge Musical Club. "Baron Fred", as he was known, was a frequent participant in the regular Thursday musical soirées of the club.
The supplement to The London Gazette of 27 February 1918, in records of the partners in the firm Erlangers, records Baron Fred's home at that time as Park House, Rutland Gate, London. In 1925, d'Erlanger married Catherine, "a French woman of good family". In 1932, he put his name on the foundation stone of what was then the Musicians' House, later renamed Merebank House, in what was then fairly open countryside between Dorking and Horsham, constructed for the Musicians' Union (which he supported) as retirement home for five musicians.
The article in the Dorking and Leatherhead Advertiser about this event in June 1932 said :  
"Musicians’ Home : Foundation Stone Laid at Holmwood : A Picturesque Ceremony
Fanfares by twelve trumpets, twelve trombones and twelve drummers selected from leading London orchestras opened a picturesque ceremony which took place at South Holmwood last Friday afternoon.  The ceremony was that of the laying of the foundation stone of the British Musicians’ Society’s convalescent home by Baron Frederic D’Erlanger.
This home will be the first convalescent home specially built for musicians in this country and the Society has been working for the last ten years to accumulate the necessary funds. The site, which is conveniently near Holmwood Station, is to be found amidst glorious surroundings and is ideal for a home of that kind. In all about 24 acres of land have been purchased, and it is the Society’s aim to have not only a convalescent home but an orphanage and a hostel for aged musicians on the estate.  The building, which has been designed by Mr Douglas Anderson, is in the course of erection by Messrs Trollope and Colls and will be ready for occupation in the autumn.  
Baron D’Erlanger, who has rendered great assistance in connection with the provision of this home, is a patron of the British Musicians’ Pension Society and is, perhaps, even better known as a composer of great merit than as a banker.  His opera “Tess” in which he has wedded Thomas Hardy’s story to music has frequently been performed at Covent Garden and elsewhere.  He has also composed many other works including an impressive Requiem which was broadcast recently. 
Among those present at the ceremony last Friday were Sir Henry and Lady Wood, Mr Joseph Lewis (of B.B.C. fame) ) [Joseph Lewis born 1878 was a conductor at the BBC – went on in 1938 to form his own orchestra after leaving the BBC], Mr C. E. Dawling, Mr. C. Hoggett, and Mr Leonard W. Pinches (Hon. Secretary of the Pension Society).  The last two named are founders of the Society and with Mr Dawling have been untiring workers since the idea of a convalescent home was first mooted. As the Baron arrived for the ceremony, the trumpeters heralded his approach.  
He was welcomed by Mr Pinches who said that that moment saw the stage all set and the curtain about to rise on their convalescent home, the mother home of the great institution for musicians which they hoped would arise on the beautiful estate which they saw all around them.  When the society started some 23 years ago one of its objects was to erect a convalescent home for musicians.  It was talked about but nothing was actually done until almost last year when they set about it with a purpose.  Slowly and surely they made ground and by the end of last year they had almost £980.  Then came the Baron, their great friend and helper.  He took a lively interest in that work and it was largely through his assistance that they were able to be present for the ceremony that day.  
Baron D’Erlanger said he thought a great deal was owing to the musical community at large, for he had no hesitation in saying that it was due to them and not him that the home was made possible.   He hoped the home which was about to be erected would be a success and he hoped it was but the first chapter in a long and happy story.  He also wished to pay a tribute to the assistance rendered by Sir Henry and Lady Wood, Mr Joseph Lewis, Mr Pinches, Mr Hoggett, and Mr Dawling.  
The actual ceremony of laying the stone was then performed after there was another fanfare followed by a prayer by the vicar of Holmwood, George L Cole, and a hymn.  A choir composed of singers from Covent Garden and the Carl Hush and other well known choirs sang the chorus from the opera “Tess” and the Easter Hymn from “Cavalleria Rusticana”.  The solo part in the latter was taken by Miss May Blyth, the celebrated soprano.  The ceremony concluded with the singing of the National Anthem.
Baron D’Erlanger was afterwards presented with the silver trowel with which he performed the ceremony". 
Baron D’Erlanger's own home by then was at 4, Moorgate, but he actually died whilst staying at Claridges Hotel London, a favourite of his, 23 April 1943, leaving £601,461 in his will, one of his two executors being his nephew, Leo Frederic Alfred D'Erlanger, son of Baron Fred's brother, the French painter Baron Rodolphe d'Erlanger who was the constructor of Ennejma Ezzahra. The other executor was a solicitor.


== References ==


== External links ==
Hyperion CD of the Violin Concerto with biographical notes
Free scores by Frédéric Alfred d'Erlanger at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)