Title: Estimated sign
Aspects: {'E-sign'}

The estimated sign, ℮, also referred to as the e-mark or "quantité estimée" (Unicode U+212E), can be found on some prepacked products in Europe. Its use indicates that the prepackage fulfils European Union Directive 76/211/EEC. The shape and dimentions of the e-mark are defined in European Union Directive 2009/34/EC. The e-mark is also used on prepackages in Australia and South Africa.
The scope of the directive is limited to prepackages that have a predetermined nominal quantity of between 5 grams (0.18 oz) and 10 kilograms (22 lb) or 5 millilitres (0.18 imp fl oz; 0.17 US fl oz) and 10 litres (2.2 imp gal; 2.6 US gal); is filled without the purchaser present, and where the quantity cannot be altered without opening or destroying the packing material.
The estimated sign indicates that:

the average quantity of product in a batch of prepackages shall not be less than the nominal quantity stated on the label;
the proportion of individual prepackages having a negative error greater than the tolerable negative error shall be sufficiently small for batches of prepackages to satisfy the requirements of the official reference test as specified in legislation;
none of the prepackages marked have a negative error greater than twice the tolerable negative error (since no such prepackage may bear the sign).The tolerable negative error is related to the nominal quantity and varies between 9 per cent on prepackages nominally 50 g (1.8 oz) or 50 ml (1.8 imp fl oz; 1.7 US fl oz) or less, to 1.5 per cent on prepackages nominally 1 kg (2.2 lb) or 1 litre (0.22 imp gal; 0.26 US gal) or more. The tolerable error decreases as nominal quantity increases, and is done by alternating intervals where there is a percentage error and intervals where there is a fixed error (and thus over those intervals the percentage error decreases).
The sign looks like a stylised lowercase "e" and its shape, ℮, is precisely defined by European Union Directive 2009/34/EC. It must be placed in the same field of vision as the nominal quantity. The sign has been added to the Unicode list of characters at position U+212E.
The estimated sign may be printed on a prepackage if:

the quantity of product in the prepackage and its labelling meet the requirements, and
the packer either measures the quantity of product of each package while filling or carries out production checks in accordance with procedures recognized by the competent departments in the member state, and
the packer holds at the disposal of those departments documents containing the results of such checks and corrections and adjustments as have been shown to be necessary.


== Tolerable negative error ==

Error tolerance decreases as nominal quantity increases, by alternating intervals of a given percentage error with intervals of a given amount error: these interpolate between the stepwise decreases in percentage error.
The estimated sign indicates that the average quantity of product in a batch of prepackages is not less than the nominal quantity stated on the label.

When using the table, the values of the tolerable negative errors shown as percentages in the table, calculated in units of weight or volume, shall be rounded up to the nearest 0.1 g or 0.1 ml.


== References ==


== See also ==
CE marking (stylized )
EC identification and health marks


== External links ==
Evertype article
Council Directive of 20 January 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making-up by weight or by volume of certain prepackaged products