Title: F. J. Brennan Catholic High School
Aspects: {'F. J. Brennan'}

F.J. Brennan Catholic High School is a Catholic secondary school located in Windsor, Ontario, Canada. It is operated by the Windsor-Essex Catholic District School Board. It serves students from grades 9 to 12. F.J Brennan has an enrollment of 631 students, as of May 2014.


== History ==

F.J. Brennan Catholic High School was originally named Corpus Christi High School (meaning "the Body of Christ") and was founded in 1953. It was the first Catholic co-educational secondary school in Windsor. In 1965, Corpus Christi High School was expanded and renamed F.J. Brennan Catholic High School in honour of Monsignor Francis J. Brennan, a Windsor priest prominent in the Catholic educational system in Ontario.
Starting in the Winter 2002 semester and ending in the Fall 2003 semester, a major renovation was completed on the school, displacing students between three separate campuses.  Two were former elementary schools while the third campus was the remaining accessible part of the school. The expansion included a glass walled weight room, a new chapel, new flooring, offices, halls, lockers, and a new cafeteria. In Fall 2003, a 50th anniversary celebration/reunion was held in the newly renovated school where past decades of students attended. Certain hallways carried a theme to honor a decade (1950's, 1960's, 1970's, 1980's. 1990's and 2000's) where memorabilia was displayed.
Each year, F.J. Brennan Catholic High School and St. Joseph's Catholic High School take part in the annual Father Zakoor Cup hockey game, where this year the St. Joseph Lasers beat the Brennan Cardinals.  The current record of the Zakoor Cup series is 14-5-3 in favour of Brennan.

Due to the lack of students at F.J Brennan, the school was on the verge of closure. In response, the WECDSB created the Corpus Christi Middle School at the site of Brennan. The new school accepts Grades 7 through 8. Student then continue on to F.J Brennan. The school is also known for the popular YouTube video "Operation Band Prank (The Final Countdown)." In the video students in the marching band march through the halls of FJ Brennan playing The Final Countdown by Europe. 
The school's strengths are in academics, sports (particularly football, volleyball and hockey), and the arts (it has excellent, award-winning music and drama programs).


== Notable alumni ==
Rick Limoges, former Windsor City Councillor and MP for the riding of Windsor—St. Clair
Joel Quenneville, NHL coach and former player
Michael Douglas, Former Chatham Maroon and current Brooks Bandits frozen water sport player
Corey Cole, Former professional volleyball player and entrepreneur


== See also ==
List of high schools in Ontario