Title: Gigantopithecus
Aspects: {'G. giganteus'}

Gigantopithecus (from the Ancient Greek γίγας gigas "giant", and πίθηκος pithekos "ape") is an extinct genus of ape that existed from two million years to as recently as one hundred thousand years ago, at the same period as Homo erectus would have been dispersed, in what is now Vietnam, China and Indonesia placing Gigantopithecus in the same time frame and geographical location as several hominin species. The primate fossil record suggests that the species Gigantopithecus blacki were the largest known primate species that ever lived, standing up to 3 m (9.8 ft) and weighing as much as 540–600 kg (1,190–1,320 lb), although some argue that it is more likely that they were much smaller, at roughly 1.8–2 m (5.9–6.6 ft) in height and 180–300 kg (400–660 lb) in weight. Based on peptide sequence data, their closest living relatives are orangutans.


== Taxonomy ==

The first Gigantopithecus remains described by an anthropologist were found in 1935 by Ralph von Koenigswald in an apothecary shop. Fossilized teeth and bones are often ground into powder and used in some branches of traditional Chinese medicine. Von Koenigswald named the theorized species Gigantopithecus.Since then, relatively few fossils of Gigantopithecus have been recovered. Aside from the molars recovered in Chinese traditional medicine shops, Liucheng Cave in Liuzhou, China, has produced numerous Gigantopithecus blacki teeth, as well as several jawbones. Other sites yielding significant finds were in Vietnam and India. These finds suggest that the range of Gigantopithecus was in southeast Asia. There are presently three extinct named species of Gigantopithecus: G. blacki, G. bilaspurensis, and G. giganteus.
In 1955, 47 G. blacki teeth were found among a shipment of "dragon bones" (also called "oracle bones") in China. Tracing these teeth to their source resulted in the recovery of more teeth and a rather complete large mandible. By 1958, three mandibles and more than 1,300 teeth had been recovered. Gigantopithecus remains have come from sites in Hubei, Guangxi, and Sichuan, from warehouses for Chinese medicinal products, as well as from cave deposits. Not all Chinese remains have been dated to the same time period, and the fossils in Hubei appear to be of a later date than elsewhere in China. The Hubei teeth are also larger.Chinese physical anthropologist and paleoprimotologist Dong Tichen suggested that Gigantopithecus bears a series of quite distinctly differentiated characteristics of its own. Thus it stands for a completely independent branch on the primate genealogical tree. Dong considered Gigantopithecinae as a new subfamily, with Gigantopithecus as its type genus, which logically associates with Ponginae, not with Homininae. Consistent with this, peptide sequences obtained from five G. blacki tooth enamel proteins reported in 2019 have indicated a Miocene divergence from the orangutan lineage of 10-12 million years ago; the Gigantopithesus-Pongo clade in turn is thought to have diverged from African great apes about 19 million years ago.Gigantopithecus blacki (named in honour of the friend and colleague of von Koenigswald, Davidson Black) is known only through fossil teeth and mandibles found in cave sites in South China and Vietnam. These are appreciably larger than those of living gorillas, but the exact size and structure of the rest of the body can only be estimated in the absence of additional findings. Dating methods have shown that G. blacki existed for at least a million years, going extinct about 100,000 years ago after having been contemporary with anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens) for tens of thousands of years, and co-existing with H. erectus, who preceded the appearance of H. sapiens. In 2014, for the first time, fossil teeth and mandible of G. blacki were found in Indonesia.Some of the caves in which teeth have been found were not caves yet at the time the apes lived, but just fissures. It has been suggested that Gigantopithecus bones were brought there by giant porcupines, who chew on bones as a source of calcium. This may help explain the lack of Gigantopithecus bones today.


=== Evolution ===
In the past, Gigantopithecus blacki was thought to be closely related to early hominins, particularly Australopithecus, on the basis of molar evidence; this is now regarded a result of convergent evolution. Gigantopithecus is now placed along with the orangutan in the subfamily Ponginae.Gigantopithecus giganteus, half the size of G. blacki, was previously assigned to Gigantopithecus following Szalazy and Delson (1979), who also synonymized the nominal species Gigantopithecus bilaspurensis with giganteus and considered Indopithecus a junior synonym of Gigantopithecus to create the new combination G. giganteus. Although giganteus is clearly related to G. blacki, Cameron (2001, 2003) concluded that Indopithecus should be treated as distinct from the Gigantopithecus type species. He also agreed with Szalay and Delson (1979) that bilaspurensis is a junior synonym of giganteus.


== Description ==

Gigantopithecus' appearance is not known, because of the fragmentary nature of its fossil remains. It possibly resembled modern gorillas, because of its supposedly similar lifestyle. Some scientists, however, think it probably looked more like its closest modern relative, the orangutan. Based on the upper estimates, Gigantopithecus possibly had few or no enemies when fully grown. However, younger, weak, or injured individuals may have been vulnerable to predation by big cats, large constrictor snakes, crocodiles, machairodonts, hyenas, and H. erectus. Based on the lower estimates, however, even fully grown individuals may have been vulnerable to predation by all the animals mentioned above other than large snakes.
The majority view is that the weight of such a large, heavy animal would put enormous stress on the creature's legs, ankles, and feet if it walked bipedally; while if it walked on all four limbs, like gorillas, its weight would be better distributed over each limb.


== Paleobiology ==
The genus lived in Asia and probably inhabited bamboo forests, since its fossils are often found alongside those of extinct ancestors of the giant panda. Most evidence points to Gigantopithecus being a herbivore. However, tooth enamel isotope analysis indicates it was not a bamboo specialist like pandas, but had a more generalist vegetarian diet more similar to that of orangutans.


=== Diet ===
The jaws of Gigantopithecus are deep and very thick. The molars are low-crowned and flat, and exhibit heavy enamel suitable for tough grinding. The premolars are broad and flat and configured similarly to the molars. The canine teeth are neither pointed nor sharp, while the incisors are small, peglike, and closely aligned. The features of teeth and jaws suggested that the animal was adapted to chewing tough, fibrous food by cutting, crushing, and grinding it. Gigantopithecus teeth also have a large number of cavities.In addition to bamboo, Gigantopithecus consumed other vegetable foods, as suggested by the analysis of the phytoliths adhering to its teeth. An examination of the microscopic scratches and gritty plant remains embedded in Gigantopithecus teeth suggests that they fed on seeds and fruit, as well as bamboo.After changes in climate during the Pleistocene era, Gigantopithcus may have changed to a diet more reliant on fruit due to bamboo becoming more scarce. This comes from the fact that many fossilized Gigantopithecus teeth contain eroded enamel, most likely the result of a diet that contained high amounts of acidic fruit.


== Extinction ==
Gigantopithecus may have become extinct approximately 100,000 years ago because the climate change during the Pleistocene era changed the plants from forest to savanna, and their food supply of fruits decreased. Gigantopithecus did not eat the grasses, roots, and leaves that were predominant food sources in the savanna.There is also speculation that competition with H. erectus may have contributed to the extinction of Gigantopithecus. This is because both H. erectus and Gigantopithecus fossils were discovered in South China, indicating that the two species may have coexisted at one time. Coexistence may have led to competition over food such as bamboo, which was quickly becoming a rarity with the changing climate of the Pleistocene.


== See also ==
Timeline of human evolution


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Park, Michael Alan. Biological Anthropology. Mayfield Publishing Co., 1996, ISBN 1-55934-424-5