Title: Gymnema sylvestre
Aspects: {'G. sylvestre'}

Gymnema sylvestre is a perennial woody vine native to tropical Asia, China, the Arabian Peninsula, Africa, and Australia. It has been used in Ayurvedic medicine. Common names include gymnema, Australian cowplant, and Periploca of the woods, and the Hindi term gurmar, which means "sugar destroyer".The leaves and extracts contain gymnemic acids, the major bioactive constituents that interact with taste receptors on the tongue to temporarily suppress the taste of sweetness.


== Description ==
The plant is a climber with leaves having soft hairs on the upper surface. The leaves are elongated-oval in shape. It has a small, yellow, umbelliferous inflorescence that is produced throughout the year.


== Properties ==
G. sylvestre has a long history of use in herbal medicine and a broad range of therapeutic properties.Its leaves contain triterpenoid saponins, flavonols, and gurmarin. The major biologically active plant molecules are gymnemic acids, a class of triterpenoid saponins, which have the effect of suppressing the taste of sweetness on the tongue from sucrose (sugar), stevia, xylitol, and artificial sweeteners such as aspartame.The sweet-blocking effect of G. sylvestre lasts from 15 to 50 minutes and may even persist for several hours.  Gymnemic acids apparently have no long-term effects on taste and they do not influence bitter, salty, and sour taste perception.


== Uses ==
Reduction of sugar intake: G. sylvestre extracts taken in the form of lozenges, mouthwash, or tea diminishes the consumption of sweet foods and overall caloric intake.  Extracts (formulated as a mint lozenge) reduced the desire for high-sugar foods and the pleasant taste of candy. Research also suggests that Gymnema sylvestre extracts reduce cravings for sugar. In a double-blind study, participants who received a gymnemic acid lozenge declined candy (before tasting it) more often than the placebo group.
Diabetes:  Early research suggests when a specific gymnema extract (GS4) is taken orally along with insulin or diabetes medications, blood sugar reduction in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes is enhanced.
Weight loss: In Japan, 50 tons of G. sylvestre leaves are consumed annually for the purpose of weight loss. Early research suggests that taking a specific combination of Gymnema sylvestre extract, hydroxycitric acid, and niacin-bound chromium by mouth for 8 weeks might reduce body weight in people who are overweight or obese.
Traditional uses: In Eastern and Ayurvedic medicine, G.  sylvestre leaves and extracts have been used to treat eye diseases, allergies, constipation, cough, dental caries, obesity, stomach ailments, and viral infections.  G.  sylvestre has also been used as an antioxidant, antimicrobial, and aphrodisiac.


== Etymology ==

Gymnema derives from the Greek words gymnos (γυμνὀς) and nēma (νῆμα) meaning "naked" and "thread", respectively; the species epitheton sylvestre means "of the forest" in Latin.The Hindi and Urdu name gurmar, Sanskrit madhunashini,   Malayalam chakkarakolli, and Telugu podapatri, literally mean "sugar destroyer". (Sanskrit) meshasringa  translates as "ram's horn", a name given to the plant due to the shape of its fruits.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Ambasta SP (1986). The useful plants of India. New Delhi: Publications & Information Directorate, Council of Scientific & Industrial Research. ISBN 978-81-85038-02-5.


== External links ==
 Media related to Gymnema sylvestre at Wikimedia Commons
Gymnema sylvestre in West African plants – A Photo Guide.