Title: G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero (1989 TV series)
Aspects: {'G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero (disambiguation)'}

G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero is a half-hour American animated television series based on the toyline from Hasbro and the comic book series from Marvel Comics. The series was produced by DIC Animation City and ran from 1989 to 1992.


== Background ==
The series debuted in 1989, with a five-part mini-series titled Operation: Dragonfire. The regular series began in 1990, lasting for two seasons and 44 episodes. The series continued the original G.I. Joe animated series produced by Sunbow Productions and Marvel Productions that ran in syndication from 1985 to 1986.
In order to cut production costs for the original animated series, Hasbro dropped Sunbow and contracted DiC to continue the series. Story editor Buzz Dixon explained in an interview: "Hasbro had been funding G.I. Joe out of their own pocket; they got a ridiculous deal from DiC to take over the series and they pretty much let them."The DiC series is a continuation of the Sunbow show, though it chose to focus primarily on new characters of the period. Hawk was retained as G.I. Joe commander, and at times shared his duties with Sgt. Slaughter as head of the G.I. Joe team. Captain Grid-Iron was given field commander duties in Season 1, with Duke regaining his old position and appearing more often in Season 2. Storm Shadow was also now a member of G.I. Joe, as action figures of the character had been sold as a Joe rather than a Cobra since 1988, keeping in line with the story of the comics, where he had abandoned Cobra in 1986-87.
The first season centered almost exclusively on the 1990 Joes; meanwhile, Cobra, having a less extensive cast, was augmented by select characters from 1989 and the yet-to-be-released 1991 figures. This new ensemble had a much wider variety of Cobra Officers as viewers were introduced to the Night Creepers and their leader, and many different forms of Vipers.
The first season of the DiC series was mainly standalone episodes that focused on establishing new team members and plots. After the "Operation Drangonfire" miniseries, the DiC show lowered the animation budget and began a series of two part episodes, which often told a deeper story involving more dramatic life and death situations for the Joes. The theme song and underscore for both seasons were provided by Stephen James Taylor.
Also a casualty of the animation company changeover was the extensive voice cast Sunbow employed, which largely consisted of voice actors employed by West Coast American companies. Because the DiC series was produced in Canada, an almost entirely new cast was assembled. Only a few actors from the Sunbow series returned for the DIC series; Sgt. Slaughter, Chris Latta (the voice of Cobra Commander), Ed Gilbert (General Hawk), Jerry Houser (Sci-Fi) and Morgan Lofting (Baroness). With Season 2, Chris Latta was the only voice actor to return, and the Baroness and Hawk were recast with new voices.


== Cast ==
Jackson Beck - Narrator ("Operation Dragonfire" mini-series)
Michael Benyaer - Airwave, Scoop 
Don Brown - Drop Zone, Sub-Zero, Crimson Guard Immortal (The Greatest Evil)
Jim Byrnes - Alley Viper, Rimpoche (Operation Dragonfire)
Garry Chalk - Pathfinder, Shockwave, Gristle, Metal-Head, BIOK
Brent Chapman - Red Star, Salvo 
Lisa Corps - Lady Jaye (Operation Dragonfire), Zarana, Range Viper 3/Evy
Kevin Conway - Rock 'n Roll, Topside
Ian James Corlett - Rampart, Gnawgahyde, Billy Blaster
Michael Donovan - Cloudburst, Flint, Night-Viper
Suzanne Errett-Balcom - Lady Jaye (Season 1), Scarlett, Baroness (Season 2)
Ed Gilbert - General Hawk (Season 1) 
Ted Harrison - Duke
Phil Hayes - Airborne, Tracker
Fred Henderson - Lt. Falcon 
Jerry Houser - Sci-Fi 
Lee Jeffrey - Stalker 
David Kaye - General Hawk (Season 2) 
Terry Klassen - Altitude, Cesspool 
Josh Andrew Koenig - Ambush (Season 1), Night Creeper Leader (Season 1)
Maurice LaMarche - Big Ben, Dusty, Heavy Duty, Low-Light, Mercer, Ozone, Psyche-Out, Spirit, Copperhead, Destro, Major Bludd, Serpentor 
Chris Latta - Cobra Commander 
Morgan Lofting - Baroness (Operation Dragonfire and Season 1) 
Blu Mankuma - Roadblock, Guardian of El Dorado
Scott McNeil - Big Bear, Freefall, Skymate, Storm Shadow, Dice, Headman, Slice 
Rick Poltaruk - Range-Viper (Season 1)
Bob Remus - Sgt. Slaughter 
Alvin Sanders - Stretcher 
Robert O. Smith - Grunt, Wet-Suit 
William Taylor - Bullet-Proof, Static-Line
David Wills - Bullhorn
Dale Wilson - Capt. Grid-Iron, Mutt, Overkill, Skydive 


== Crew ==
Madeline Bascomb - Voice Director (Season Two)
Marsha Goodman - Voice Director ("Operation Dragonfire" mini-series), Casting Director (Season One and Two)
Shirley McGregor - Talent Coordinator
Ginny McSwain - Voice Director ("Operation Dragonfire" mini-series)
Doug Parker - Voice Director ("Operation Dragonfire" mini-series and Season One)
Paul Quinn - Voice Director (Season Two)
Victor Villegas - Voice Director ("Operation Dragonfire" mini-series)


== Home media ==


=== VHS ===
Select episodes of the series were released on VHS. The first tape, "Revenge of the Pharaoh", was released in 1990 by Hasbro packaged with an action figure of G.I. Joe member Rapid-Fire, who was named after DiC executive Robby London. Buena Vista Home Video later distributed a series of three VHS tapes in 1992, each containing a single episode.
Revenge of the Pharaoh (packaged with "Rapid-Fire" action figure)
El Dorado the Lost City of Gold
Chunnel
Infested Island


=== DVD ===
After releasing the entire Sunbow series on DVD, Shout! Factory and Vivendi Entertainment subsequently released the entire DiC series. G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero Series 2, Season 1 was released on January 10, 2012, and Season 2 was released on July 10, 2012.


== See also ==
G.I. Joe
G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero
G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero (1985 TV series)
G.I. Joe: The Movie
G.I. Joe (comics)
G.I. Joe Extreme
G. I. Joe: Sigma 6


== References ==


== External links ==
G.I. Joe: Operation Dragonfire on IMDb
G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero (DiC TV series) on IMDb
G.I. Joe (DiC's Version) at Retrojunk.com
G.I. Joe (DIC) at YOJOE.com
G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero at TV.com