Title: Greig Pickhaver
Aspects: {'H. G. Nelson'}

Greig Pickhaver AM (born 1948)  is an actor, comedian and writer, who forms one half of the Australian satirical sports comedy duo Roy and HG as the excitable sports announcer H.G Nelson. The award-winning duo teamed up in 1986 for the Triple J radio comedy program This Sporting Life, and were broadcast nationwide for 22 years, leading to several successful television spinoffs.


== Personal life ==
Pickhaver was born in Nuriootpa, South Australia to parents Gordon Pickhaver, and Beryl Skuce. His father was a World War II veteran who saw action in the Middle East and on the Kokoda Trail and whose career was in the South Australian dairy industry. Pickhaver has three sisters Jane, Anne and Mary and a brother Mark. Pickhaver was raised in Brighton, South Australia up to the age of 15 then the family moved to the suburb of Prospect where he lived until the age of 22. He attended Oaklands Park Primary school, Brighton High School and for the last two years of high school Adelaide High. He graduated from Flinders University and describes himself as dyslexic and having always relied heavily on memory and recall to achieve any academic results.


== Radio career ==
Pickhaver performed in plays at school and at university. After a stint as a roadie for Australian rocker Billy Thorpe in the early 1970s he became involved in the Melbourne theatre co-operative The Pram Factory. He moved into radio broadcasting on 3RRR in Melbourne and developed the HG Nelson character while performing in the Melbourne radio sports comedy show Punter To Punter in the early 1980s.
Pickhaver met Doyle in 1985 while both were playing minor characters in an SBS TV show and they teamed up as Roy and HG in 1986. Their radio comedy program This Sporting Life was broadcast initially in Sydney and later nationally on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Triple J  youth radio network. It was continuously on-air for a 22-year period till 2008. This Sporting Life was added to the National Film and Sound Archive's Sounds of Australia registry in 2013.


== Television and film career ==
With John Doyle as Rampaging Roy Slaven, has appeared on television shows such as The Dream with Roy and HG, This Sporting Life, Blah Blah Blah, Club Buggery, The Channel Nine Show, Planet Norwich, Win Roy and HG's Money, The Monday Dump, The Nation Dumps, The Ice Dream with Roy and HG, The Cream, The Dream in Athens, The Memphis Trousers Half Hour, and Roy and H.G’s Russian Revolution. Pickhaver hosted It's a Knockout from 2011 to 2012 alongside former Hi-5 star Charli Robinson and sports presenter Brad McEwan. Pickhaver joined Stephen Quartermain and Alisa Camplin for the Sochi Tonight show during the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympics in February 2014, and was featured in the SBS series Who Do You Think You Are? in September 2015. Many of his television opportunities have been "alternative" sports presentation coverages of the Summer or Winter Olympics.
Pickhaver starred in the cult Australian comedy film This Won't Hurt a Bit opposite Jacqueline McKenzie. In 2003 he appeared in the political comedy, The Honourable Wally Norman.


== Published works ==
1989: Pants off, this sporting life, by Roy Slaven and H.G. Nelson
1994: Where it all went wrong [sound recording] : address delivered by H.G. Nelson, anti-smoking activist, to the National Press Club, Canberra on World No Tobacco Day, 1 June 1994
1994: Boys and balls, by Brian Nankervis; in the press box: Roy Slaven and H.G. Nelson 
1996: Petrol, bait, ammo & ice,  by H.G. Nelson, with a foreword by Roy Slaven; illustrated by Reg Mombassa
1999: It's yours for a sawn-off! : Sameranch's Sydney, by H.G. Nelson; illustrations by James de Vries
2006: The really stuffed guide to good food 2006, edited by H.G. Nelson
2008: Sprays, by H. G. Nelson 
2011: My life in SHORTS, by H. G. Nelson


== References ==


== External links ==

HG Nelson ABC
Greig Pickhaver on IMDb