Title: I Am Not an Easy Man
Aspects: {'I Am the Man'}

I Am Not an Easy Man (French: Je ne suis pas un homme facile) is a 2018 French romantic comedy directed by Éléonore Pourriat. The film stars Vincent Elbaz as a chauvinist who ends up in a parallel universe where stereotypical gender roles are reversed. The film was released worldwide on April 13, 2018, by Netflix. It is the second French-language Netflix original film (after Blockbuster) and the first French-language film commissioned by Netflix.


== Synopsis ==
Damien is a shameless chauvinist who has all the benefits of living in a patriarchal society. After a bump to the head, Damien passes out. When he wakes up, he finds himself in what seems to be an alternate universe where gender roles are reversed and women have the power. Damien, confused, now that he experiences sexism himself, struggles to find his place in this foreign new world, and seduce Alexandra, a (female) chauvinist herself and influential novelist in this female-dominated world.


== Cast ==
Vincent Elbaz as Damien
Marie-Sophie Ferdane as Alexandra
Pierre Bénézit as Christophe
Blanche Gardin as Sybille
Céline Menville as Lolo
Christele Tual as Annie
Moon Dailly as Alexandra's coach
Camille Landru-Girardet as Ludovic


== Production ==
The film finds its origins in Oppressed Majority (French: Majorité opprimée) a 2010 short film directed by Pourriat, about a stay-at-home dad who experiences sexism in a parallel, female-dominated world, and eventually becomes the victim of sexual assault. In 2014, after being released on video-sharing platform YouTube with English-language subtitles, the short garnered international attention and Pourriat was approached by Netflix to develop a new, larger project on the initial premise. Pourriat initially wanted to make a series, but, with the help of her producers, Eleonore Dailly and Edouard de Lachomette, she and Netflix eventually agreed to produce a feature-length romantic comedy.The film premiered on Netflix on April 13, 2018. In accordance with French laws on digital film distribution, the film was not scheduled for theatrical release in France, in order to be immediately available online. Pierre Bénézit, the lead actor of Oppressed Majority, played as supporting character Christophe in I Am Not an Easy Man.


== References ==


== External links ==
I Am Not an Easy Man on Netflix
I Am Not an Easy Man on IMDb
I Am Not an Easy Man at Rotten Tomatoes