Title: I Am What I Am (Mark Morrison EP)
Aspects: {'I Am What I Am'}

I Am What I Am is the second extended play by English hip hop and R&B musical recording artist Mark Morrison. It was released in the United Kingdom on MackLife Records on 7 July 2014. The EP has received mixed to positive reviews from critics.


== Background ==
Recording started in 2010, and the EP was also first announced in 2010.A music video for N.A.N.G. 2.0 was uploaded to YouTube on 21 October 2013 at a total of four minutes and 9 seconds. To coincide with the songs and video theme, it was released in October, which is National Domestic Violence Awareness Month (in United States). The video was premiered by KarenCivil.com.A music video for the title track I Am What I Am was uploaded to YouTube on 12 May 2014 at a total of two minutes and 54 seconds. The video premiered on Vice Noisey.


== Reception ==
The EP received generally mixed to positive reviews from music critics. DJ JD of DJ JD Studios complimented "'I Am What I Am', definitely takes me back in time to the glory days of the 90's. Sitting in front of the TV, flipping through the channels and ending up on MTV to watch latest music videos from TRL (Total Request Live). Soothing yet dance-able; smooth yet intricate, this collection of tracks is high quality work." Whilst musiceyz.co.uk said "Mark’s voice is heavily treated making him sound a bit too synthed and computerized." Jonny Abrams of Rocksucker gave a negative review of I Am What I Am, saying "It might have gotten away with it had the song itself not been so listless", with a heading of "The worst of this week’s singles: Itch, Mark Morrison, Stooshe and more!".I Am What I Am (Mark Sparks Remix), which featured American rapper and Slaughterhouse member Crooked I, debuted on the SingersRoom.com website on 16 May 2013. It became the Number 1 most played single that week, on the websites "IndieRotation Singles Chart". The song was supported by Vibe Magazine, who added it to their V-Playlist and reviewed the track saying "It's been a while since we've heard from Mr. Morrison. However, his new soulful track has been worth the wait...". DJBooth.net rated I Am What I Am (Mark Sparks Remix) 4 out of 5 stars, with a positive review saying "anthemic cut, expanding the original’s aural palette with 808s, swirling synths and a brand new chopped-n-screwed outro". DJ Blaze of DJBooth also commented "This beat by Mark Sparks is tough and Mark Morrison ripped this. Good feature by Crooked I. BANGER!"


== Track listing ==
All tracks written by Mark Morrison.


== References ==