Title: Six (musical)
Aspects: {"I Don't Need Your Love (disambiguation)"}

Six is a British musical with book, music and lyrics by Toby Marlow and Lucy Moss. The musical is a modern retelling of the lives of the six wives of Henry VIII presented as a pop concert, as the wives take turns singing and telling their story to see who suffered the most due to Henry and should therefore become the group's lead singer.
The musical was first presented by Cambridge University students at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival in 2017. It has since gone on to professional productions in the West End and internationally.


== Plot ==
The show opens with the Queens performing an opening number in pop-concert, girl-group fashion that introduces themselves and welcomes the audience to the performance ("Ex-Wives"). They address the crowd through means of breaking the fourth wall and tell them that this show will feature a competition, and whoever had the "biggest load of B.S." to deal with from the man who married them, Henry VIII, will be the one to lead the group. Catherine of Aragon starts off and recounts her marriage to Henry and later annulment, and almost being put into a nunnery when he began lusting after Anne Boleyn ("No Way"). When Aragon claims that she is the winner, the other Queens mention Anne and how she overlapped with Aragon during the former's marriage, resulting in said annulment, and Anne recounts her time as Queen with Henry and her eventual execution ("Don't Lose Ur Head"). Jane Seymour then announces it's her turn to recount what she put up with, but the other Queens mock her for not having as much to deal with as, in her words, she was "the only one he truly loved". Seymour admits that while she may have been lucky for not having to suffer at his hand, she still stood by him throughout all his faults ("Heart of Stone").
The story then shifts as the Queens are suddenly turned into members of Hans Holbein's painting studio, talking about how they make the women he paints look beautiful for portraits. In a set-up parodying Tinder (or another similar dating site) they present three women: Christina of Denmark, Amalia of Cleves, and Anna of Cleves, Amalia's elder sister. When Henry "swipes right", so to speak, on Anna, they all assume he will marry Anna and they will be happily married ("Haus of Holbein/Haus of Holbein Playoff"). Of course, their union is ultimately ill-fated as he rejects Anna, and she pretends to make a big deal about how she is then forced to live in a beautiful palace in Richmond as a result, though she's not really complaining ("Get Down"). After the Queens point out Cleves' life doesn't sound that difficult, Cleves says "Oh, well, back to the palace". As Katherine Howard is next to go, the Queens belittle her for being "the least relevant Catherine", but Howard retaliates by mentioning flaws in the other Queens' reasons for winning. She then recounts her life and the men who hurt her, leading into her marriage to Henry and eventual beheading ("All You Wanna Do").
When the Queens get into a massive fight about who should win the title of lead singer by comparing their Henry-related traumas, Catherine Parr puts a stop to it, questioning if being remembered solely for being Henry's wives - rather than by what they actually did as Queens - is the true way to win, telling her story in the process ("I Don't Need Your Love"). They slowly but surely agree with her and sing proudly that they don't need the love of Henry to feel validated as people ("I Don't Need Your Love (Remix)"). With only five minutes left in the show after the fact, they decide to use their remaining moments on stage to "rewrite" the stories they told, and sing for themselves for a change, singing together as a group rather than as solo artists, and writing their own happily ever after ("Six").
In all of the live performances of the show as of July 2019, the Queens perform an encore number that isn't featured on the Original Cast Recording, which is a mashup of all the songs performed in the show (minus "Haus of Holbein") called "Megasix". Coincidentally, this is the only song allowed to be recorded during a live performance, and the Queens encourage the audience to film the song, which brings the concert feel of the show full circle, as it's normally seen as disrespectful to film theatrical performances.


== Musical numbers ==
"Ex-Wives" – The Queens
"Ex-Wives (Reprise)" – The Queens †
"No Way" – Catherine of Aragon
"Anne Boleyn (Interlude)" – The Queens †
"Don't Lose Ur Head" – Anne Boleyn
"Heart of Stone" – Jane Seymour
"Haus of Holbein" – Company
"Haus of Holbein (Playoff)" – Company †
"Get Down" – Anna of Cleves
"All You Wanna Do" – Katherine Howard
"I Don't Need Your Love" – Catherine Parr
"I Don't Need Your Love (Remix)" – Catherine Parr & the Queens ††
"Six" – The Queens
"Megasix" – The Queens †† Not included on the Studio Cast Recording.
†† Included as part of "I Don't Need Your Love" on the Studio Cast Recording.


== Productions ==


=== Edinburgh Fringe (2017) ===
The idea for the musical came to Toby Marlow while studying in his final year at Cambridge University, and despite uncertainties from collaborator Lucy Moss, the pair wrote the musical while studying for their final exams. The world premiere production took place at the Edinburgh Fringe in 2017, presented by Cambridge University Musical Theatre Society.


=== Professional debut and UK Tour (2018) ===
The Edinburgh production attracted the attention of producers Kenny Wax and Global Musicals, and they gave the show its professional debut on 18 December 2017, performing four Monday night performances at the Arts Theatre. A studio  recording was released on 13 September 2018, featuring the original Arts Theatre cast.
Six began its first UK tour on 11 July at the Norwich Playhouse, returning to the Edinburgh Fringe on 1 August 2018. Six transferred to the Arts Theatre in the West End with an opening night on 30 August. The production closed on 14 October prior to continuing its UK Tour. The UK tour ended on 30 December 2018 in Glasgow. During the Glasgow production, Renée Lamb briefly returned to the show to play the role of Catherine of Aragon as a result of cast illness.


=== West End (2019) ===
The musical re-opened for an initial 16-week run at the Arts Theatre on 17 January  The initial run has since been extended until July 2020. Millie O'Connell (Anne Boleyn), Aimie Atkinson (Katherine Howard), Maiya Quansah-Breed (Catherine Parr) and Courtney Stapleton (Alternate Jane Seymour and Catherine Parr) departed the musical on 13 October 2019. Courtney Bowman, Vicki Manser and Danielle Steers now portray Anne Boleyn, Katherine Howard and Catherine Parr respectively, and have been since 15 October 2019 with new Alternates Zara Macintosh, Cherelle Jay and Hana Stewart. Collette Guitart will be an understudy for all of the Queens along with being Dance Captain for the show taking over from Grace Mouat who left the show on the 18th of August 2019. 


=== North American Tour (2019) ===
Six had its North American premiere at the Chicago Shakespeare Theater in May 2019. Directed by Jamie Armitage and Lucy Moss, the Chicago premiere was produced by Six's London producers with the addition of Broadway producer Kevin McCollum. According to Chris Jones the Chicago production was a likely Broadway tryout. After an extended run in Chicago, the same production moved to the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Massachusetts in August and September of 2019, and made its Canadian premiere at Edmonton's Citadel Theatre in November. The production is then scheduled to play the Ordway Center for the Performing Arts in St. Paul, Minnesota, from 29 November through 22 December, prior to its Broadway debut.


=== Norwegian Cruise Line (2019) ===
On 6 August 2019, Norwegian Cruise Line announced that they would be showing performances of Six on three of their ships at different times. The shows began in September 2019 on Norwegian's Bliss and will run until 2022.


=== Australia (2020) ===
Six will have its Australian premiere at the Sydney Opera House, beginning January 2020.  It will then move to Melbourne's Comedy Theatre in April and Adelaide's Her Majesty's Theatre in June as part of the Adelaide Cabaret Festival. The Australian production is produced by Louise Withers, Michael Coppel and Linda Bewick.


=== Broadway (2020) ===
Six will begin previews on Broadway in February and will open on 12 March 2020 at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre. The production will star the cast of the show's Chicago premiere.  Lucy Moss and Jamie Armitage are to again direct,  with choreography by Carrie-Anne Ingrouille, set design by Emma Bailey, costumes by Gabriella Slade, sound by Paul Gatehouse, lighting by Tim Deiling, and orchestrations by Tom Curran, with music supervision and vocal arrangements by Joe Beighton.


=== Chicago (2020) ===
On 4 August 2019, at the final performance of the Chicago premiere, it was announced that Six would return to the city for a 16-week run at the Broadway Playhouse from 8 July through 25 October 2020.


== Principal cast ==


== Reception ==
In a review of the Arts Theatre production, Dominic Cavendish of The Telegraph called the show "gloriously – persuasively – coherent, confident and inventive". Lyn Gardner of The Guardian wrote, "It may be cloaked in silliness, but Six makes some serious points about female victimhood and survival."In a review of the Chicago production, Chris Jones of The Chicago Tribune praised the show as "dynamic" and a "blast", with a "sense of humor and spirited radicalism." Marlow and Moss are "gifted comic writers," he noted, and he praised the "musical force of the intensely committed and talented actresses" in the Chicago cast. Jones suggests the show could use 10 more minutes of material that gets away from the plot's singing contest conceit, and toward the emotional center of the characters. He also thinks the orchestration of the songs could be more substantial.  Jones believes Six has an audience that is ready for it, in part because it gets to a complex historical paradox and treats it with verve, the memories of women in history being tied to the life of a man. Hedy Weiss of WTTW praises the musical as "sensational", singling out each performer in the Chicago cast. Weiss also thinks the show makes a convincing case for each character, and in addition to praising the writers, notes the "dynamite direction by Moss and Jamie Armitage, and powerhouse music direction by Roberta Duchak" as well as, "Gabriella Slade’s glittering costumes . . . and Tim Deiling’s arena-style lighting". According to Rachel Weinberg of Broadway World, "Six carries out [a] joyful and anachronistic takedown of the patriarchy" through the performances of a "brilliant" cast and a book and score with an inventive and sensational compositional method. Jesse Green of The New York Times wrote that the musical is "pure entertainment", the writing is "wickedly smart", the "terrific singers" of the Chicago cast sell the show "unstintingly", and the production values "befit a splashy North American premiere with Broadway backing."


== Awards ==


=== Original West End production ===


=== Chicago theater ===


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Official Website


== References ==