Title: I'll Always Know What You Did Last Summer
Aspects: {'I Know What You Did Last Summer (disambiguation)'}

I'll Always Know What You Did Last Summer is a 2006 American slasher film. Released direct-to-video, the film is the third and final installment of I Know What You Did Last Summer trilogy, but does not have any of the cast returning from the first two installments. The film instead takes the basic myth of the series and starts it over with a new set of characters. I'll Always Know What You Did Last Summer was released on DVD and Blu-ray on August 15, 2006 and has grossed in excess of $20 million.


== Plot ==
In 2005, Amber Williams, her boyfriend Colby Patterson and their friends Zoe, Roger, and P.J. stage a prank at the town carnival where Roger impersonates the "Fisherman" killer. Afterward, everyone sees P.J.'s body impaled on a pipe instead of mattresses that were supposed to break his fall. The public believes the Fisherman is behind it, and the friends burn the evidence and make a pact to keep it secret.
One year later, Amber returns to town to discover that Colby never left to pursue his scholarship. She goes up to the mountains where she encounters one of the officers who witnessed the accident, Deputy Haffner (K.C. Clyde). Later that night, Amber awakens to 50 text messages reading "I know what you did last summer". She drives to Zoe's shack where Zoe allows Amber to sleep for the night. The next day they find Roger and Colby, but they angrily dismiss them when told about the messages. Amber is attacked on a ski-lift by someone wielding the hook.
A drunken Roger contemplates suicide with the hook from the prank. When he investigates a noise, he is attacked and killed by the Fisherman. Colby is also attacked while swimming. They go to warn Roger and find him dead along with a suicide note and the hook. Deputy Haffner shows up and gets their statements. Afterwards, they return to Amber's house to find pictures of them from the high school yearbook sliced up and stuck to the wall reading "SOON". They all stay at Zoe's place and find Lance, P.J.'s cousin, outside. He shows them a message engraved on his motorbike.
The night of Zoe's concert, after her performance, she, Amber and Lance are attacked by the Fisherman. Zoe is stabbed and thrown over a balcony to her death. P.J's dad, the sheriff, comes in, only to be killed as well. The Fisherman then attacks Colby in a kitchen and hooks him in the mouth, killing him. Outside, Amber and Lance run into Deputy Haffner, who reveals that Roger told him about the accident. The Fisherman then advances towards Haffner and impales him on a forklift.
Amber and Lance get into a car and run the fisherman down. He gets up and is revealed to be the undead Ben Willis, the man who committed the original murders 10 years ago. Willis attacks them, but is cut with a hook by Amber and disappears. Amber and Lance go to face Willis, deducing that the hook will hurt him. They are chased into a warehouse. Amber then fights Willis and eventually stabs him in the head, and pushes him into a snow blower driven by Lance, killing Willis.
A year later, Amber is driving across the desert when a tire blows out. She stops the car, and loses reception. Willis appears behind her and she screams as the film ends with a slicing sound of the hook.


== Cast ==
Brooke Nevin as Amber Williams
David Paetkau as Colby Patterson
Torrey DeVitto as Zoe Warner
Ben Easter as Lance Jones
Seth Packard as Roger Pack
Clayton Taylor as P.J. Davis
Michael Flynn as Sheriff Davis
K. C. Clyde as Sheriff John Hafner
Brittanie Nicole Leary as Kim
Star LaPoint as Kelly
Don Shanks as Fisherman / Ben Willis
Junior Richard as Lone Performer
Lira Williams as Anna


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Director Sylvain White was brought in as a last-minute replacement after the previous director was fired, and thus had to cast the film, prep the locations, and devise the shooting schedule within just two weeks. White did not use any CGI in the film, as he felt that gore looks much more realistic with practical effects than with CGI.


== Music ==
A soundtrack of the film was never released.

"LFL" - performed by Goth Jones
"Colosseum" - performed by The Bedbugs
"U Owe It 2 U" - performed by Weapon of Choice
"I Want You" - performed by FFF
"Body Rot" - performed by Goth Jones
"Something I Haven't Thought Of...In Years" - performed by Mazey Gordens & The Brick Hit House Band
"Business in the Front/Party in the Back" - performed by Mazey Gordens & The Brick Hit House Band
"FFT" - performed by Goth Jones
"One of Those Nights" - performed by Junior
"Step to the Floor" - performed by Illegal Substance
"Daredevil" - performed by Weapons of Pleasure
"Between You and Me" - performed by Suffrajett
"NY" - performed by Suffrajett


== Release ==


=== Critical response ===
The film holds a 0% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on six reviews. Scott Weinberg of DVD Talk called it "a 12th-generation knock-off that leeches off a flaccid little concept that was already withered and whiskered the first and second time around." He described the directing, editing, script, and acting all as predictable and uninteresting, ultimately summarizing the film as "Not so much outrageously awful as it is deadly dry and dishwater dull".


== References ==


== External links ==
I'll Always Know What You Did Last Summer on IMDb
I'll Always Know What You Did Last Summer at AllMovie