Title: INS Sarvekshak
Aspects: {'J22'}

INS Sarvekshak (J22) is a hydrographic survey ship in the Indian Navy, under the Southern Naval Command. Apart from a helicopter and Bofors 40 mm gun, the ship is also equipped with four survey motor boats, two small boats. The ship was awarded the runner up trophy in the 2015 Innovation Trophy awards given out on Navy Day as an operational unit by Prime Minister Narendra Modi. The award was given for developing an innovative solution for tidal measurement during Hydrological Surveys by use of land based terrain mapping equipment and floating buoys mounted with prisms. The award was accepted by Capt Rajesh Bargoti, the Commanding Officer of INS Sarvekshak.


== Ship history ==
Built by Goa Shipyard Limited and commissioned into the Naval service at Kochi naval base in 2002, Sarvekshak is the Indian Navy's eight hydrographic survey and perhaps the last ship under Sandhayak-class to have been indigenously designed and constructed.
INS Sarvekshak is equipped with a range of surveying, navigational, and communication systems. The next-generation surveying systems provided onboard include multi-beam swath echo sounding system, differential global positioning system, motion sensors, sea gravimeter, magnetometer, oceanographic sensors, side scan sonars and an automated data logging system as well as state-of-the-art Digital Survey and Processing System, sound velocity profiling system among others. These systems allow the ship to meet the stringent international/ISO 9002 digital survey accuracy standards required for the production of electronic navigation charts and publications as laid down by the International Hydrographic Organisation.The Sarvekshak is powered by two diesel engines and is capable of sustained speeds. The ship's multi-role capability places her in the league of the most versatile survey vessels in the world. It can undertake a variety of tasks under trying conditions.


== Primary task ==
The primary task of INS Sarvekshak includes Hydrographic Surveys, Nautical Chart preparation & Cartography & Training. The ship is also equipped with ROV, AUV & USV. As part of protocol the ship also took part in International Defence Exhibition 2009 held at Abu Dhabi  In 2015 Sarvekshak, was deployed in Mauritius for 5 weeks to help in Survey Operations. INS Sarvekshak was also deployed in 2011 to Mauritius as part of survey operations to execute the following tasks in 3 phases.
(a) Survey off Rodrigues for delineation of Continental shelf.
(b) Survey of Port Louis Harbour
(c) Survey of passes off Mauritian Coast
(d) Checking serviceability of survey equipment held with Government of Mauritius
(e) Undertake training of Mauritian survey officers and NCG personnel.
INS Sarvekshak had previously visited Mauritius in February 2006 and March 2007 to undertake hydrographic surveys. The survey work by INS Sarvekshak was of immense help to Mauritius with regards to fishing, ecosystem preservation and management, establishment of artificial reefs, delimitation of the Continental Shelf of Mauritius and safe navigation of ships and crafts. In 2007 the ship surveyed Port Mathurin, Rodrigues, which was last surveyed 133 years ago.
In 2011 the ship was also deployed in Seychelles to carry out hydrographic surveys off the atoll of Aldabra, Picard Island, Polyminie and part of Malabar Island and Grande-Terre island on the request of Government of Seychelles as the last survey of the area was done back in 1960s. 
As part of goodwill tour 20 students from Jammu and Kashmir also toured the ship in 2011.


== Solar power ==

In 2017 Sarvekshak became the 1st ship of Indian Navy ever to deploy solar power. It has innovatively deployed the zero-maintenance solar power system, capable of generating 5.4 kW electricity and replacing the ship’s traditional 4.4 kW emergency diesel alternator. The installation cost was around Rs. 19 lakh and the generation cost is Rs. 12 per kv per hour. The estimated savings for a lifespan of about 15 years is around Rs. 1 crore. The current diesel generator consumes a litre of diesel to produce five units of electricity. Captain Rajesh Bargoti, the commanding officer of the ship, said It took about six months to put the entire system in place. We are now using solar energy for lights and a couple of air conditioners.' The estimated profit generated in a ship service life of 25 years is Rs 2.7 crore in this small project alone. "Even if the system is used for 25 days in one year, the system can repay its cost in less than 10 years while protecting the nature," the Navy said.
Indian Navy claimed that the 300-Watt panels will generate about 5.4 kW solar power system, and avoid around 165 kg of carbon a day, "So in its 25 years life the total carbon saved is around 15 lakhs kg and 5.75 lakh litres of diesel by this innovation"  Noting that the world is looking for clean, renewable sources of energy in order to protect and reduce the harm caused to the environment, the Navy said the deterioration of the environment is highly correlated to the production and usage of fossil-based fuels worldwide. The Navy said it has created a new mechanism to encourage the utilization and development of renewable energy resources.


== Key facts ==
The solar power generating system has been installed by customising and installing ‘razor-thin, flexible’ solar panels on the canopy of its telescopic (retractable) helicopter deck.
It has lightweight, extra-thin and flexible unbreakable solar panels imported from United States along with no-fume solid electrolyte batteries. These industrial grade panels are found to be performing well in all-light conditions and are shade-tolerant. They also have a maintenance-free life for 24 years making it maintenance free.
The system is 100% reliable for a power source that can be used for communication equipment, general lighting onboard and battery charging round the clock with battery outputs during night.
The low cost system will slash a yearly carbon emission of 60,225 kg and save around 22,995 litres of diesel used to run the vessel’s emergency diesel alternator.


== References ==


== External links ==