Title: JAB Holding Company
Aspects: {'Jab (disambiguation)'}

JAB Holding Company (“JAB” or Joh. A. Benckiser) is a privately held German conglomerate, headquartered in Luxembourg, that includes investments of companies operating in the arenas of consumer goods, forestry, coffee, luxury fashion, and fast food, among others.As of 2015, JAB’s portfolio included a minority stake in the consumer products company Reckitt Benckiser, and majority stakes in Coty, Peet’s Coffee & Tea, Caribou Coffee Company, Jacobs Douwe Egberts (JDE), Einstein Noah Restaurant Group, and Jimmy Choo. As of that date, JAB also owned Bally, Belstaff, Zagliani, Espresso House, and Baresso Coffee.In August 2014, under the Peet's Coffee & Tea brand, JAB acquired Mighty Leaf Tea, a specialty tea retailer based in the San Francisco Bay Area. In October 2015, Peet's Coffee & Tea acquired Portland, Oregon's Stumptown Coffee in a deal whose terms were not disclosed, and in the same month acquired a majority stake in Chicago-based Intelligentsia Coffee & Tea.In March 2016, JAB and other investors acquired Keurig Green Mountain for $13.9 billion. In May 2016, JAB-controlled JAB Beech reached an agreement to acquire US doughnut shop operator Krispy Kreme for $1.35 billion.
In April 2017, JAB reached an agreement to buy U.S.-based Panera Bread, a fast casual bakery-café chain, for $7.5 billion. Also in April, JAB was reported to be stepping back from investment in luxury goods, with reported plans to sell its stakes in the designer shoe and clothing brands Jimmy Choo, Bally, and Belstaff. In August 2017, JAB announced the acquisition of Bruegger's Bagels.On 29 January 2018, Keurig Green Mountain announced it was acquiring Dr Pepper Snapple Group, with JAB owning 87% of the combined companies. As of February 2018, JAB retained ownership of a minority stake in Bally after sale of its majority stake to the Chinese conglomerate, Shandong Ruyi. JAB's beverage empire was described in 2018 as having been built on "buy now, pay later" (extended terms of trade) principles; some coffee roasters owned by JAB are reported to require up to 300 days of financing from their suppliers.


== Ownership ==
Owned by Germany’s Reimann family, 90% of JAB Holding belongs to four of the late Albert Reimann Jr.'s nine adopted children. They trace their wealth to chemist Ludwig Reimann, who, in 1828, joined with Johann Adam Benckiser (founder of the namesake chemical company). Reimann married one of Benckiser's daughters and ended up owning the business. Great-grandson Albert Reimann Jr. took over after his father died in 1952 and added consumer goods.Initially each of the nine children had inherited 11.1% ownership in JAB upon Albert's death in 1984. In the following years, five of the heirs sold their stakes to the other four: Matthias Reimann-Andersen, Renate Reimann-Haas, Stefan Reimann-Andersen and Wolfgang Reimann. As of January 2015, each of the four owns about $3.8 billion in JAB shares.The primary shareholder of JAB, as listed in its 2016 Consolidated Financial Statements, is Austrian-domiciled company Agnaten Holding SE. Agnaten is listed, by PrivCo, as a subsidiary of Joh. A. Benckiser GmbH, the investment vehicle of the Reimann family.


== Controversy ==
On 24 March 2019, the family admitted that Albert Reimann Sr. and Albert Reimann Jr. were supporters of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi party, and that historical research revealed that the company used 175 forced labourers and employed a foreman who was known for his cruel treatment from 1943 onwards. The family has vowed to give €10 million (US$11.3 million) to charity.Two months later, several of the Reimanns revealed to The New York Times that their mother, Emilie Landecker, Albert Jr.'s mistress, baptized as a Catholic like her mother, was the daughter of Alfred Landecker, a Jewish man deported to the Izbica Ghetto in 1942. His ultimate fate is unknown although many Jews sent to Izbica were held there pending transport to the Belzec and Sobibor extermination camps. They have renamed the family foundation after him and doubled its budget to €25 million (US$28.2 million), to fund projects that honor the victims of the Holocaust and Nazism.


== References ==