Title: Lonchura
Aspects: {'L. grandis'}

Lonchura is a genus of the estrildid finch family, and includes munias (or minias), mannikins, and silverbills. They are resident breeding birds in Africa and in South Asia from India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka east to  Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, and the Philippines. Two of the approximately thirty-seven species are also native to Australia. The name mannikin is from Middle Dutch mannekijn 'little man' (also the source of the different bird name manakin).Some of the Lonchura species were formerly placed in Spermestes.  Others have been placed in a genus of their own, Euodice.


== Taxonomy ==
The genus Lonchura was introduced by the English naturalist William Henry Sykes in 1832. The type species was subsequently designated as the scaly-breasted munia. The name Lonchura combines the Ancient Greek words lonkhē  "spear-head" or "lance" with oura "tail".


== Characteristics ==
They are small gregarious birds which feed mainly on seeds, usually in relatively open habitats, preferring to feed on the ground or on reeds of grasses. Several species have been noted to feed on algae such as Spirogyra.The nest is a large domed grass structure into which four to ten white eggs are laid. Some species also build communal roosting nests for overnight rest.
The species in this genus are similar in size and structure, with stubby bills, stocky bodies and long tails. Most are 10–12 cm in length. Plumage is usually a combination of browns, black and white, with the sexes similar, but duller and less contrasted for immature birds.
The similarities within this group and the existence of subspecies with differing vocalisations and plumage mean that some races may be elevated to species status. African and Indian silverbill are now usually considered distinct species, and the two races of black-throated munia are often also split.
The munias are popular in the bird trade and many freed or escaped birds have formed feral colonies in different pockets across the world.
The red munia Amandava amandava and green munia Amandava formosa also take the name munia, but are in the genus Amandava.


== Species ==

The genus contains 35 species:
Bronze mannikin, Lonchura cucullata also known as bronze munia
Black-and-white mannikin, Lonchura bicolor also known as black-and-white munia
Red-backed mannikin, Lonchura nigriceps also known as brown-backed munia
Magpie mannikin, Lonchura fringilloides also known as magpie munia
White-rumped munia, Lonchura striata
Javan munia, Lonchura leucogastroides
Dusky munia, Lonchura fuscans
Black-faced munia, Lonchura molucca
Scaly-breasted munia, Lonchura punctulata also known as nutmeg mannikin or spice finch
Black-throated munia, Lonchura kelaarti also known as Jerdon's mannikin
White-bellied munia, Lonchura leucogastra
Streak-headed mannikin, Lonchura tristissima
White-spotted mannikin, Lonchura leucosticta
Five-colored munia, Lonchura quinticolor
Tricolored munia, Lonchura malacca
White-capped munia, Lonchura ferruginosa
Chestnut munia, Lonchura atricapilla
White-headed munia, Lonchura maja
Pale-headed munia, Lonchura pallida
Great-billed mannikin, Lonchura grandis
Grey-banded mannikin, Lonchura vana
Grey-headed mannikin, Lonchura caniceps
Grey-crowned mannikin, Lonchura nevermanni
Hooded mannikin, Lonchura spectabilis
Forbes's mannikin, Lonchura forbesi
Hunstein's mannikin, Lonchura hunsteini
Yellow-rumped mannikin, Lonchura flaviprymna
Chestnut-breasted mannikin, Lonchura castaneothorax
Black mannikin, Lonchura stygia
Black-breasted mannikin, Lonchura teerinki
Eastern alpine mannikin, Lonchura monticola
Western alpine mannikin, Lonchura montana
Buff-bellied mannikin, Lonchura melaena
Timor sparrow, Lonchura fuscata
Java sparrow, Lonchura oryzivora


== Notes ==


== References ==
Birds of India by Grimmett, Inskipp and Inskipp, ISBN 0-691-04910-6
Birds of The Gambia by Barlow, Wacher and Disley, ISBN 1-873403-32-1