Title: Sydney Trains M set
Aspects: {'M-set'}

The Sydney Trains M sets or Millennium trains are a class of electric multiple unit operated by Sydney Trains in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. The fourth generation trains entered service from 1 July 2002 after short delays due to electrical defects. The trains can operate over the entire suburban network, but currently only operate on T2 Inner West & Leppington, T3 Bankstown, T5 Cumberland, T6 Carlingford, T7 Olympic Park and T8 Airport & South lines.
The M sets replaced the 1960s Tulloch trailers and provided extra capacity on the CityRail network.


== Design ==
The Millennium train, like the entire Sydney Trains fleet and electric NSW TrainLink fleet, is a double decker. It is a four car consist, with the middle two cars being non-control motor cars and the two outer cars being driving control trailer cars fitted with the pantograph. The Millennium train is equipped with an AC drive system, whereas the Tangara has a DC drive system. The sets usually operate in eight-car formations with two four-car sets combined.
While the Millennium train concept is an evolution of the Tangara concept (manufactured by A Goninan & Co), the Millennium train introduced new features such as internal electronic destination indicators, automated digital voice announcements for upcoming stops, a return to reversible seating, surveillance cameras, wider stairways, a new safety yellow colour scheme, and push-button opened internal doors. The Millennium Train also introduced crumple zones to absorb impact in a collision. Interiors were designed by Transport Design International.The train also features emergency help points, allowing passengers to contact the train crew in an emergency. The help points are located on the sides of the stairwell to the upper deck. There are actually two help points in the same location, with a large one at face height with a microphone and speaker, and a lower one with a microphone only. Another safety feature on some carriages are emergency door releases, which were retrofitted to some trains. This allows passengers to manually open the doors in an emergency, as recommended in the report for the Waterfall rail accident. However, this program was abruptly stopped for unknown reasons, leaving the system installed on some carriages only.
The Millennium train features Scharfenberg couplers.M sets are 3030mm wide, being classed by Transport for NSW as medium width trains. This allows them to operate within the whole Sydney Trains suburban network, as well as the entire (electrified section) of the South Coast Line and Central Coast & Newcastle Line. They may also operate on the Blue Mountains Line between Central and Springwood. Note that while they can operate on these lines, they are not scheduled to do so as they are suburban trains.Set M1 has a slightly different interior design for unknown reasons. It has differently coloured doors and different seat handles.


== Delivery ==
The cars were constructed by EDi Rail at Cardiff Workshops. The contract included a 15-year maintenance agreement with EDi Rail to maintain the trains at a specialised maintenance centre at Eveleigh. During testing and initial revenue service, they ran as four car sets, with eight car sets commencing service towards the end of 2002 after further testing. All 35 four car sets were delivered by October 2005.
The initial order signed in October 1998 was for 81 carriages, in December 2002 an option was taken up for an additional 60. In February 2017, Sydney Trains exercised an option to extend Downer's maintenance of the trains for a further 10 years.


=== Criticisms ===
The Millennium trains were criticised for having several technical problems and causing problems with the CityRail network; they were referred to in the media reports as The "Mi-lemon" and "Millenni-Bug" as a result. Some of the problems were caused by insufficient power supply on the overhead to cope with the power demands of the more technologically advanced trains causing them to shut down. Software bugs also contributed to the trains' poor reliability.
The Millennium trains were withdrawn from service in April 2003 while the problems were being rectified and a full audit was carried out. They were subsequently reintroduced into service in June 2003 and have since been operating on the T2 Airport, Inner West & South, T3 Bankstown, T6 Carlingford and T7 Olympic Park lines. After the new timetable was released on 26 November 2017, M sets began as 4-car services on the T5 Cumberland line on both weekdays & weekends, along with a few 8-car Waratahs.


== In service ==


=== External Carriage Camera Trial ===

In late 2008 some trains were fitted with external cameras atop of carriages near the doors, testing their use for the then-future Waratah trains. These cameras were subsequently incorporated into the final design of the Waratah train.


=== Lines serviced ===
The Millennium trains typically operate on the following lines (normally described as Sector 2):

T2 Inner West & Leppington Line: Leppington or Parramatta to City Circle via Granville
T3 Bankstown Line: Liverpool or Lidcombe to City Circle via Bankstown
T5 Cumberland Line: Leppington to Richmond
T6 Carlingford Line: Clyde to Carlingford (weekends/public holidays only)
T8 Airport & South Line: Macarthur to City Circle via Airport or Sydenham


=== Maintenance Depots ===
The trains were originally maintained at Eveleigh Maintenance Centre. This is indicated by the green target plate on the ends of trains. In 2018, to make way for upgrades to Eveleigh for the New Intercity Fleet, maintenance for these trains were moved to Auburn Maintenance Depot. As target plate colours are increasing losing their meaning and because Auburn has not been assigned a colour, the target plates were kept the same colour.
As with all other trains, these trains are not exclusively kept in Auburn overnight. They only need to return to the depot for maintenance, and at other times, they may be stabled at various yards on the lines that they operate, such as Liverpool and Leppington yards.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Beckhaus, John; Halgren, Stephen (2007). Sydney's Electric Trains. Australian Railway Historical Society NSW Division. ISBN 978-0-975787-08-3.


== External links ==
 Media related to Sydney Trains M set at Wikimedia Commons
Technical diagrams and specifications Transport for NSW