Title: N8 Research Partnership
Aspects: {'N8'}

The N8 Research Partnership is a partnership created in 2007 of the eight research-intensive universities in Northern England – Durham, Lancaster, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle, Sheffield and York. The N8 Research Partnership aims to maximise the impact of this research base by identifying and co-ordinating powerful research teams and collaborations across the North of England. Collectively, the N8 universities undertake more than £650 million of research income per annum and employ over 18,000 academic staff, thus forming the largest research-pooling partnership ever undertaken in the UK. The N8 Research Partnership also works closely with industry.


== Research ==
The N8 Research Partnership initially focused on five areas of research: Ageing and Health, Energy, Molecular Engineering, Regenerative Medicine and Water. The themes were chosen to build on existing research within the partnership which had the potential for economic and social benefit. 
In March 2007, the N8 Research Partnership was awarded grant funding of £6 million from The Northern Way Growth Fund to set up 'virtual' collaborative Research Centres around each of these themes.Today, the N8 Research Partnership's main research themes include: Bioeconomy, Urban Transformation  including Policing, Digital Creativity, and AgriFood Resilience.In 2015, multimillion-pound funding was awarded to N8 Research Partnership, to advance AgriFood Resilience, and Policing, research areas across N8 institutions and with partners.N8 has become a leader in equipment sharing, having launched a project to map the research equipment across universities in the North, and has published a toolkit and a white paper to point the way to greater collaboration between universities and improved research links with industry. A toolkit, and database, have been developed to advance this area nationally.The N8's key aim of fostering greater collaboration with industry was boosted in January 2012 when the N8 Industry Innovation Forum launched. There have to date been five IIF meetings focused on topics where there is significant cross-sector, industry-led demand for new insights and research capability on topics such as advanced materials, Food Security, and Active and Healthy Ageing. New collaboration ideas emerging from these have generated £10m of external funding including £3m from industry partners.Another development was the launch of the N8 High Performance Computing facility in March 2013. This provides industry and university researchers with access to high performance computing alongside consultancy and e-infrastructure training. At its peak the HPC is capable of performing 110 trillion operations per second, the equivalent of half a million iPads.The N8 continues to drive innovation opportunities across the North of England, coordinating proposals and fostering new innovation ideas.


== Universities ==

The eight universities in the N8 Research Partnership are all located in Northern England. They represent all of the pre-1992 universities in the region except for the University of Hull. Five of the members are civic universities founded as university colleges in the second half of the nineteenth century, two are collegiate campus  plate glass universities founded in the 1960s, and one is a pre-Victorian collegiate university founded in the first half of the nineteenth century. They range in size from around 13,000 students to just under 40,000, and in annual income from a few hundred million pounds to over a billion. Seven of the N8 universities (all except Lancaster) are members of the Russell Group, and all were in the top 25 of Research Fortnight's research power table based on the results of the 2014 Research Excellence Framework (where Lancaster was the highest ranked non-Russell Group institution).The three N8 institutions in Yorkshire (Leeds, Sheffield and York) also collaborate in the White Rose University Consortium.
Between them, the N8 universities educate over 190,000 students, including 17,000 studying for a research degree, and have a combined research income of over £1.2 billion. A report in 2016, commissioned by the group, demonstrated that they bring in £12.2 billion to the regional economy each year and generate 119,000 jobs across the North of England.


== References ==


== External links ==
N8 website
Leeds press release on the N8 Group
N8 High Performance Computing capability
regeNer8 – the N8 Centre for Translational Regenerative Medicine
Policing Research website
N8 AgriFood