Chartered Association of Building Engineers

Chartered Association of Building Engineers (CABE) is a professional body for building engineers in the United Kingdom and overseas.


== History ==
Chartered Association of Building Engineers was founded as the Incorporated Association of Architects and Surveyors (IAAS) in 1925 in London. The Incorporated Association of Architects and Surveyors became the Association of Building Engineers in 1993 and then the Chartered Association of Building Engineers in 2014, its current name.The IAAS was among the bodies which opposed a draft bill which was presented to Parliament in 1927 by the Royal Institute of British Architects' (RIBA) Registration Committee in the course of events which resulted in the passing of the Architects (Registration) Act 1931.
Under the 1931 Act, the Architects' Registration Council of the United Kingdom (ARCUK) was established with the duty of setting up, maintaining and publishing the Register of Architects.  The IAAS was among the bodies named, together with the RIBA, in the First Schedule of the Act as being entitled to appoint one member in respect of every five hundred of their own members.
The Register of Architects is now maintained and published under the Architects Act 1997, which reconstituted ARCUK.  In consequence, the IAAS was no longer an appointing body, nor any of the other bodies named in the 1931 Act, which has been repealed.


== Structure ==
CABE is a membership organisation and is governed by a board of directors that sets the objectives of the organisation - the executive team deliver these objectives. Entry to membership of CABE is via several routes, and members must undertake continuing professional development throughout the lifetime of their membership of the association in order to maintain their professional standards.
DesignationsCABE has several designations for members, these are:
Associate Members may use "ACABE" after their names and are at technician level of membership.
Graduate Members may use "GradCABE" after their names for those at graduate level of membership.
Corporate Members may use "MCABE" after their names and are considered fully professionally qualified.
Corporate Fellows may use "FCABE" after their names and are senior corporate members.Registered Chartered Members of the CABE are entitled to use the description "Chartered Building Engineer" and the designation C.Build E


=== Regions ===
CABE has regions in the United Kingdom and Ireland each with elected Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer and Committee, these are:
Eastern
East Midlands
Northern
Northern Ireland
North West
Republic of Ireland
Scotland
Southern
South West
Wales
West Midlands
Yorkshire & HumberIn addition, CABE operates in the following countries:

Australia
Malaysia
Hong Kong
Singapore
Middle East
Macau
USA
China


== See also ==
Architectural engineering
Architects' Registration Council of the United Kingdom
Architects Registration Board
Architectural technologist
Building engineer
Faculty of Architects and Surveyors
Society of Architects (1884-1925)
Society of Professional Engineers UK
Reform of Architects Registration


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website