John Fish (businessman)

John Fish is an American businessman. He is the longtime chairman and CEO of Suffolk Construction Company, the largest building company in New England, and was chair of the private effort to secure Boston’s bid for the 2024 Summer Olympics. Fish was the chair of the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce and was the chairman of the board of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. In 2012 and 2015, Boston magazine named him the #1 most powerful person in Boston, and the 6th most influential person in Boston philanthropy in 2013. The Boston Globe named Fish Bostonian of the Year in 2015 and in 2018, he was named to the Boston Business Journal's "POWER 50" list.


== Early life and education ==
Fish was raised in Hingham, Massachusetts, the son of Edward A. Fish. Fish grew up with dyslexia. He attended Tabor Academy where he played football. He was captain of the team his senior year, and continued to play in college until he had a neck injury. He graduated from Bowdoin College in 1982 with a political science degree.


== Career ==
After college, Fish worked for Peabody Construction, his father's company. When he was 23, in 1982, Fish and his father established Suffolk Construction Company, an offshoot of the family construction business, which was immediately put under Fish's control. Suffolk was unique in that it used non-union labor unlike the Fish family's existing company. In 2006, Fish bought out his father's stake in the company. Fish built the company into a top national construction company responsible for high-profile projects such as Boston’s Millennium Tower, a new facility at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and most recently Encore Boston Harbor. By 2017, the company had 2,010 employees and $3.5 billion in annual sales.Fish was a vocal advocate for hosting the 2024 Summer Olympics in Boston, and he was chair of the Boston 2024 Partnership, a private group that worked on the bid until the city ultimately withdrew its bid to host the Games on July 27, 2015.In April 2017, Fish, along with other members of Partnership for New York City, visited the White House where they met with members of the Trump administration to discuss economic growth policies including infrastructure spending and financial reform. Fish also serves on the board of directors for The Real Estate Roundtable.


== Philanthropy ==
In 2008, the Lewis Family Foundation honored Fish with a CEO Social Leadership Award at the Boston Business Journal's Corporate Philanthropy & Citizenship Summit.Fish has provided scholarships for multiple children to attend Tabor Academy. In 2009, Fish founded Boston Scholar Athletes, an organization aimed at helping student athletes improve their academic performance, and he has donated $6 million to the program. The multimillion-dollar nonprofit runs tutoring centers in 20 high schools and supports underfunded athletic teams with uniforms, equipment and coaching clinics.In 2010, Fish joined a group of 14 chief executives from the largest companies in Massachusetts to establish the Massachusetts Competitive Partnership (MACP). Fish was named chairman of the organization. In 2011, Fish and his wife were inducted into the Seneca Society of Hobart and William Smith Colleges.He has served as fundraising campaign chair for Brigham and Women's Hospital's “Life.Giving.Breakthroughs” $1 billion capital campaign, and has donated $5 million to the cause.In 2014, Fish was named Chair of the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce. He also served as chair of Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's board of directors until 2017. He was named chairman of Boston College’s Board of Trustees, the first non-alumnus in that role. Fish is also on the board of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Boston and was named chairman of the board of trustees of Bringham and Women's Hospital in January 2018.Fish has donated to Republican and Democrat political campaigns. He supported the Obama campaign in 2007 and raised between $100,000 and $200,000 for Obama's 2012 bid for re-election.In November 2015, Fish was given the Ralph Lowell Distinguished Citizen Award for service to others from the Boy Scouts of America Spirit of Adventure Council.In 2018, Boston College named the Fish Field House in recognition of a gift from Fish as the former Board of Trustees chairman for the school. The facility has a regulation AstroTurf field, and a 12,000 square-foot strength and conditioning center.


== Personal life ==
Fish is married to Cynthia (Gelsthorpe) Fish, daughter of American marketing executive Edward Gelsthorpe. They have three daughters.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
John Fish on transforming a construction giant