Bucklow (UK Parliament constituency)

Bucklow was, from 1945 to 1950, a county constituency of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. It elected one Member of Parliament (MP), elected  by the first past the post voting system.


== Boundaries ==
In 1945, the Bucklow area consisted of small towns and countryside surrounding the larger town of Altrincham, near the city of Manchester. It is now a suburban area within the  Greater Manchester conurbation.
Before 1945 this division of the historic county of Cheshire, in North West England, formed part of the Knutsford and Altrincham constituencies. The Altrincham division had over 100,000 electors and was considered to be overlarge. As an interim measure, before the Boundary Commission for England carried out the first periodic review of Parliamentary boundaries throughout England, it was authorised by the House of Commons (Redistribution of Seats) Act 1944 (7 & 8 Geo. 6, c. 41) to divide the largest constituencies. The existing two Altrincham and Knutsford divisions were redrawn into three seats. Bucklow was a new constituency, which was added to the altered Knutsford and the more extensively modified Altrincham and Sale seats.
The new constituency comprised a small part of the County Borough of Manchester, the Urban Districts of Bowdon, Cheadle and Gatley, Hale, and Lymm as well as part of the Rural District of Bucklow.
In the first periodic review, which was given effect by the Representation of the People Act 1948 (which applied from the 1950 general election), Bucklow was divided between a number of constituencies. Cheadle and Gatley became part of Cheadle. Bowdon, Hale and Bucklow were transferred to the Knutsford division. Lymm became part of the Runcorn seat.


== Members of Parliament ==


== Election results ==


== See also ==
List of former United Kingdom Parliamentary constituencies


== References ==
Boundaries of Parliamentary Constituencies 1885-1972, compiled and edited by F.W.S. Craig (Parliamentary Reference Publications 1972)
British Parliamentary Election Results 1918-1949, compiled and edited by F.W.S. Craig (Revised edition - Macmillan Press 1977)
Who's Who of British Members of Parliament, Volume IV 1945-1979, edited by M. Stenton and S. Lees (Harvester Press 1981)
Leigh Rayment's Historical List of MPs – Constituencies beginning with "B" (part 6)