A Escrava Isaura (2004 TV series)

A Escrava Isaura (Isaura the Slave) is a 2004 Brazilian telenovela based on A Escrava Isaura, an 1875 abolitionist romance novel by Bernardo Guimarães. The series tells the story of a coffee-plantation owner's passion for one of his slaves. Herval Rossano directed both this and the 1976 version.
Rede Record, run by televangelist Edir Macedo, produced this expanded remake of a serial that aired in 1976 on Rede Globo. The series drew high ratings among Brazilian viewers and was expanded from 100 to 167 episodes. It airs in Europe and the Middle East on Zone Romantica.


== Story ==
This melodrama focuses on the conflict between the beautiful light-skinned slave woman Isaura (Bianca Rinaldi, originally, Lucelia Santos) and her cruel, lecherous master Leoncio (Leopold Pacheco) in 1855 Brazil. The heroine is the 20-year-old daughter of a white father and a mulatto mother. She was born and raised on the coffee plantation of Commander Almeida (Rubens de Falco) in the village of Goitacaces. When Juliana, Isaura's mother (Valquiria Ribeiro), dies shortly after giving birth, Gertrudes (Norma Blum), the commander's wife, treats the child as her own daughter, giving her an education and fine manners.Isaura is devoutly religious; she prays often, avoids the witchcraft practiced by some other slaves and often wears a prominent cross around her neck. Her father, a free laborer, repeatedly begs for her freedom and makes offer after offer to buy her from the commander. Despite promises to set her free one day, every offer is rejected. Isaura remains a slave because she is a slave's daughter—and freedom always seems to be just beyond her reach. When commander realizes his fault, it is too late.In 1854, when Isaura is a young adult, the commander’s son Leôncio returns to the fazenda after piling up enormous debts. He soon marries Malvina (Maria Ribeiro), daughter of Colonel Sebastiao (Paulo Figueiredo). Nevertheless, he develops a dangerous fixation with Isaura and determines to make her his mistress.The commander and Gertrudes protect Isaura from Leôncio for a while, but they become ill and pass away before setting her free. The sweet young woman winds up at the mercy of an obsessed, depraved man, fighting to maintain her dignity and integrity. As Isaura desperately struggles to keep her dreams alive, she discovers true love for the first time.


== Telemundo ==
Telemundo started airing the serial as La Esclava Isaura (dubbed into Spanish) in the US on May 7, 2007.  It temporarily aired for two hours per night from 9 to 11 p.m. (ET/PT) from July 24 until August 3, 2007. [5]  
The finale aired December 3, 2007.
In June, 2007, Isaura's time slot (which included one soccer preemption) averaged 680,000 core adult viewers (ages 18 to 49).  That was a 16 percent increase over the year before, when Decisiones aired during that hour, according to Nielsen Media Research. [6] During November, the show averaged 587,000 core viewers.
Isaura's Spanish voice is Liliana Barba, who also dubbed Lizzie McGuire and Julie Mayer from Desperate Housewives.


== Cast ==
Spanish voices and Spanish character name spellings (if they differ) in parentheses

Bianca Rinaldi (Liliana Barba) as Isaura dos Anjos, the slave girl
Leopoldo Pacheco (Mario Castañeda) as Leôncio (Leóncio) Almeida, Commander Almeida's evil son, obsessed with Isaura
Maria Ribeiro (Circe Luna) as Malvina, Leôncio's jealous wife
Jackson Antunes (Gerardo Reyero) as Miguel, Isaura's father
Rubens de Falco (Jorge Roig) as Almeida, the commander
Norma Blum (Magda Giner) as Gertrudes (Jertrudis), the commander's wife
Theo Becker (José Antonio Macías) as Álvaro Medonça (Mendoza), the suitor
Paulo Figueiredo (Alfonso Ramírez) as Col. Sebastião Cunha (Sebastián Cuña), Malvina's father
Valquiria Ribeiro (Sylvia Garcel) as Juliana, Isaura's mother
Mayara Magri (Laura Torres) as Countess Tomásia de Melo Albuquerque de Sousa Javier, Leôncio's major enemy
Patrícia França (Rebeca Gómez & Patricia Anides) as Rosa, illegitimate daughter of Col. Sebastião (later becomes his slave), Leôncio's slave that is jealous of Isaura
Déo Garcez (Roberto Mendiola) as André, Leôncio's slave, in love with Isaura
Míriam Mehler (Rocío Garcel) as Gioconda, Tomásia's mother
Ewerton De Castro (Carlos Del Campo) as Belchior, humped ugly gardener in Leôncio's house, in love with Isaura
Jonas Mello (Armando Réndiz) as Francisco [or Seu (Señor) Chico], Leoncio's foreman
Fernanda Nobre (Leyla Rangel) as Helena, Malvina's sister
Lugui Palhares (Rene García) as Diogo (Diego), Tomásia's cousin
André Fusko (Ricando Mendoza) as Gabriel, Tomásia's brother
Gabriel Gracindo (Alfonso Obregón) as Henrique (Enrique), Malvina's brother
Paula Lobo Antunes (Laura Ayala) as Aurora, Sebastião's second cousin
Silvia Bandeira (Mónica Manjarrez) as Perpétua, Álvaro's mother
Renata Dominguez (María Fernanda Morales) as Branca (Blanca), Geraldo's sister in love with Álvaro; she later becomes crazy
Aldine Müller (Rebeca Manríquez) as Estela, Perpétua's friend
Ivan De Almeida (José Luis Orozco) as João (Johan), André's father
Chica Lopes (Sylvia Garcel) as Joaquina, André's aunt
Christovam Neto (Octavio Rojas) as Bernardo, Tomasia's freed slave
Bárbara Garcia (Mayra Arellano) as Lipanesa (Lipalesa) [or Moleca (Muleca)], Bernardo's love
Fábio Junqueira (Jorge Santos) as Dr. Paulo Pereira, Helena's arranged husband
Caio Junqueira (Víctor Ugarte) as Geraldo Villela, Estela's son, Álvaro's friend
Cláudio Curi (Alejandro Mayen) as Cap. Martinho (Martiño), Slave hunter
Rômulo Delduque (Jorge Ornelas) as Raimundo, Leôncio's foreman
Rodrigo Zanardi (José Luis Reza) as Aloíso Guimarães (Alonso Guimarhaes), sergeant
Maria Cláudia (Alejandra de la Rosa) as Serafina, owner of a bar and prostitute
Lígia Fagundes (Isabel Martiñon) as Flor-de-Lís, prostitute
Thaís Lima (Mónica Villaseñor) as Margarida (Margarita), prostitute
Daniela Duarte (Gabriela Gómez) as Violeta, prostituteCast notes
Lucelia Santos has become famous all over the world for her part in this great Brazilian telenovela.


== International ==
Serial aired in: Country/ TV Channel/ Airing dates

Albania
Argentina - Telefe March 6, 2006 - November 21, 2006 - June 30, 2010 - July 23, 2010
Armenia
Bolivia - Unitel
Bosnia and Herzegovina - BHT1 - October 8, 2012 - TBA 2013
Bulgaria - Nova TV - August 9, 2010 – March 4, 2011
Chile - Chilevision January 2, 2006 - July 11, 2006
Colombia - City TV Colombia
Costa Rica - Canal 6 (Channel 6)
Dominican Republic - Tele Antillas (Channel 2)
Ecuador - Ecuavisa July 17, 2006 -
Panama - Tele 7- March 26, 2007- September 7, 2007
Peru - ATV February 20, 2006 - January 15, 2007
Portugal - RTP 1 September 5, 2005 - April 28, 2006
Puerto Rico - WAPA-TV - January 14, 2008
Romania - TVR1 - November 17, 2008 - July, 2009
United Kingdom - myChannel - Actually, including specials with the best of the week


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Zone Romantica official site (English)
Telemundo official site (Spanish)
Doblaje en Español - Spanish voice cast list
Telenovela World (bilingual)
A Escrava Isaura on IMDb