Blackhorse, Dublin (page does not exist)

The Hutch–Kinahan feud is a major feud between two criminal organizations in the Republic of Ireland that has resulted in the deaths of twenty people. The Hutch gang, led by Gerry Hutch, and the Kinahan Family, led by Christy Kinahan, are the main participants.


== Events ==


=== Murder of Gary Hutch, 24 September 2015 ===
Gary Hutch, 34, was a nephew of Gerry Hutch and a prominent gangland figure. He was originally from Champions' Avenue on the north side of Dublin. He was convicted of armed robbery; when he was released from prison, he moved to Spain and had been living there for eight years at the time of his death.He had survived an attack in August 2014 that led to boxer Jamie Moore being shot.On 24 September 2015, he was chased around a swimming pool by a balaclava-clad gunman who shot him dead in a private apartment complex in Miraflores near Marbella in Spain. It is believed he was shot dead by the Kinahan gang who he once had contacts with.


==== Trial in Spain ====
Dubliner James Quinn, a former boxer with a criminal record, was convicted of being involved in the murder by being a lookout and helping the killer to reach and flee the scene. He was also found guilty of a second charge of illegal weapons possession.The state prosecutor called on the judge to jail Quinn for a total of 28 years - 25 for the murder and 3 for the weapons possession charges. A life sentence was ruled out because jurors rejected the prosecution's claims that Quinn was a member of a criminal organisation despite the prosecution saying the killing was part of the Kinahan-Hutch feud. The jury also found that it had not been proven that Quinn had been paid for the murder.Quinn is a nephew of Martin Foley, a criminal known as "the Viper" who was an associate of Martin Cahill. He had worked as an enforcer for drug dealers and developed strong links with the Kinahans.


=== Murder of Darren Kearns, 30 December 2015 ===
Darren Kearns was shot in front of his wife shortly after he left the Phoenix Chinese restaurant on Blackhorse Avenue.
He had convictions for drug dealing and spent time in prison. The Irish Times mentioned speculation that the Kinahan gang had mistakenly thought that he and David Douglas were behind a botched murder attempt of a member of the gang in November.


=== Regency Hotel attack, 5 February 2016 ===
On 5 February 2016, a WBO boxing match for the European Lightweight title between Jamie Kavanagh and Antonio João Bento was to take place at the Regency Hotel in Whitehall, Dublin. At the weigh-in, there was an organised armed attack; the match was cancelled after the shooting. There were at least four attackers with masks, army style-helmets and flak jackets, two of whom were disguised as members of the Garda Emergency Response Unit and armed with AK-47s. An associate of the Kinahan cartel, David Byrne, was shot dead; security sources said that the gang had intended to kill others. Two men were injured and taken to the Mater Private Hospital and Beaumont Hospital. It is believed that Daniel Kinahan, the son of Christy Kinahan, was the intended target, but he had left early. After the attack, security camera recordings suggested that six people had been involved, including a man disguised as a woman. The attackers  escaped in a Ford Transit van which was later found burnt-out.On 18 May 2016, Patrick Hutch, the brother of Gary Hutch, was charged at the Criminal Courts of Justice with the murder of David Byrne. His trial for murder and possession of firearms was later set for January 2018 at the non-jury Special Criminal Court; he was denied bail.


=== Murder of Eddie Hutch Snr, 8 February 2016 ===
Eddie Hutch Snr was shot dead at his home on 8 February 2016. He was an uncle of Gary Hutch. The motive for his death is suspected to be revenge for the death of David Byrne.On 5 February 2018, a man was arrested over the murder but was released without charge.


=== Murder of Vincent Ryan, 29 February 2016 ===
Vincent Ryan was shot dead while sitting in his car outside his partner's home in Finglas. On July 31, 2019, Paul Ò Beirne and Jeffrey Morrow were sentenced to nine and 11 years, respectively, by the Dublin Criminal Court.


=== Murder of Noel Duggan, 23 March 2016 ===
Noel Duggan was shot dead while sitting in his car outside his home in Ratoath, County Meath. He was friends with Gerry Hutch from his youth and was nicknamed "Kingsize" because of his cigarette smuggling.


=== Murder of Martin O'Rourke, 14 April 2016 ===
Martin O'Rourke was shot dead on 14 April 2016 on Lower Sheriff Street, Dublin. His murder is believed to be a case of mistaken identity and part of the Kinahan-Hutch feud.


=== Murder of Michael Barr, 25 April 2016 ===
Michael Barr was shot dead on 25 April 2016. He was shot in the Sunset House in Summerhill, Dublin. An Garda Síochána suspect he was killed by the Kinahan gang because of involvement with the shooting of David Byrne at the Regency Hotel in February 2016. He had dissident republican links and is understood to have provided the weaponry involved in the attack. The dissident republicans broke off ties with the Hutch gang after Barr's murder.On 29 January 2018, the non-jury Special Criminal Court in Dublin found Eamonn Cumberton (30) guilty of the murder of Michael Barr and sentenced him to life imprisonment.
It was later revealed that Cumberton was suspected of carrying out several more murders and suspected murders and of being a leading member of the New INLA. Michael Barr had been threatened many times by the New INLA when he lived in Strabane.


=== Arrest of two Kinahan associates, 18 June 2016 ===
Two men in their thirties were arrested by armed members of the Garda Emergency Response Unit and Drugs and Organised Crime Bureau on the Naas Dual carriageway. A Glock 9mm semi-automatic handgun was found in one man's car. Both were linked to the Kinahan gang; one was a close associate of David Byrne. Gardaí believe they were planning to shoot someone.


=== Murder of Gareth Hutch, 24 May 2016 ===
Gareth Hutch was shot several times by two attackers in the carpark of the Avondale House flats complex where he lived. He was a minor figure in the criminal world. In November 2018 the Special Criminal Court found Johnathan Keogh, his sister Regina Keogh and Thomas Fox guilty of the murder. All three were sentenced to life imprisonment.


=== Murder of David Douglas, 1 July 2016 ===
David Douglas was shot outside a shop he ran with his wife in Bridgefoot Street, Dublin 8. He had survived being shot the previous November. In August 2018 'Fat' Freddy Thompson was found guilty of the murder by the Special Criminal Court.


=== Murder of Trevor O'Neill, 17 August 2016 ===
Trevor O'Neill from Drimnagh was shot in a case of mistaken identity in Costa de la Calma, near Magaluf. He was shot five times in front of his family. Gardaí believe that he was mistaken for a member of the Hutch family by the Kinahan gang. He worked for Dublin City Council.


=== Murder of Noel Kirwan, 21 December 2016 ===
Noel 'Duck Egg' Kirwan, a close associate of Gerry Hutch, was shot dead in front of his partner outside his house in Ronanstown in west Dublin.  It is believed he was killed simply because of his association with the Monk, as he was photographed talking to him at Eddie Hutch's funeral in February 2016.In May 2017, a man and woman in their 20s were arrested in north county Dublin then questioned at Lucan and Blanchardstown Garda stations. They were reported to have been acting as "spotters" for the Kinahans to pay off a drug debt. The role of "spotter" includes contacting the Kinahans when the target is spotted.Jason Keating, a 25 year-old from Rush, was brought to Blanchardstown District Court under armed escort on 8 May 2017.  Detective Sergeant Damien Gannon of Lucan Garda station told the court that Keating had been charged with the murder at Lucan Garda station, but that he had said nothing after caution. Judge David McHugh remanded the accused to appear before Cloverhill District Court the following Friday. Legal aid was granted to Keating. In a murder case in the Republic of Ireland, bail can only be granted in the High Court.A woman in her 20s who had been arrested in connection in the investigation was released without charge and a file will be prepared for the Director of Public Prosecutions.The charge of murder against Keating was dropped after he admitted participating in the activities of a criminal organisation and helping that gang to murder Mr Kirwan. In addition to fitting the tracker device under Mr Kirwan's car, Keating was also in the getaway car, in contact with the person monitoring the tracker's movements on a laptop and he conveyed those details to the person believed to have shot Mr Kirwan dead.
Keating was found guilty in and in December 2018 was sentenced to ten years. At his sentencing, Detective Inspector Mark O'Neill, also of Lucan Garda station, summed up the type of people who could be targeted in the feud: "All you have to do is be pictured beside a Hutch gang member."


=== Knife attack on Tom Fox, 28 March 2017 ===
Tom Fox, on remand in Mountjoy Prison in relation to the shooting death of Gareth Hutch, was attacked along with another inmate, suffering multiple stab wounds.


=== Arrest of three Kinahan associates, 4 April 2017 ===
An Irish man in his thirties, another aged 58, and 58-year-old Estonian man Imre Arakas were arrested by armed members of the Garda Emergency Response Unit and Drugs and Organised Crime Bureau in Blakestown Road in Clonsilla in a safe house owned by Kinahan associate Eric Fowler who had allegedly tipped-off Gardaí, resulting in his death in December 2018. It is believed the Estonian may be a hired killer, brought into the country by the Kinahan gang to continue the feud. Drugs and a list of Hutch associates were found. Only Mr Arakas was charged.


=== Shooting of James Gateley, 10 May 2017 ===
James 'Mago' Gateley, a 29-year-old long-term friend of Gary Hutch who had fled his home in Dublin's north inner city and was hiding out in Belfast and Newry, was shot by a lone gunman in his car at a petrol station in North Dublin. It is believed a bullet-proof vest he was wearing saved his life.


=== Murder of Michael Keogh, 31 May 2017 ===
Michael Keogh, who had minor links to the Kinahan gang, was shot dead in his car in the underground car park of the apartment complex where he lived in Dorset Street in north inner city Dublin.He had previous convictions for assaulting Gardaí and for firearms offences. He was before the courts in 2016 in relation to a firearms charge. He was also a known associate of Jason Molyneux and other Hutch gang members. It is believed the Kinahan cartel killed him because of this. However, he had links with numerous different criminals and Gardaí could not rule out that he was killed by another criminal gang or that he was set up to be killed by Molyneux.


=== Murder of Kane McCormack, 1 December 2017 ===
24 year-old Kane McCormack was shot in the head; his body was found in Walterstown, Co. Meath between Leixlip and Dunboyne. He was last seen alive at 5pm the previous day after telling his partner he was going to meet someone. When he failed to return, his partner became concerned for his safety and contacted the Gardaí. His car was later found at an Aldi supermarket in Clonee.Gardaí believe he parked his car at the Aldi in Clonee and then got into a black saloon-type car. Gardaí in Finglas later received a call that a black Audi was on fire just off the M50 at Meakstown Cottages at about 6pm.Kane McCormack was a son of Noel Kirwan, who was had been shot about a year before as part of the feud between the Kinahans and Hutches.One line of inquiry is that the Kinahan gang believed he posed a threat to them because he wanted revenge for his fathers' death. He had been officially warned by the Gardaí that his life was in danger. McCormack had been caught with 50 rounds of .32 ammunition in November 2017. It was suspected the ammunition was connected with dissident Republican extortion rackets. Gardaí believe he had enemies other than the Kinehan gang.A man was arrested on suspicion of McCormack's murder on 17 December 2018 but was released without charge. On 6 March 2019, another man was arrested in Mountjoy Prison in connection with the murder but he too was released without charge.


=== Murder of Derek Coakley-Hutch, 20 January 2018 ===
At about 3pm, Derek Coakley-Hutch was shot while he sat in a car in the Bridgeview halting site beside Cloverhill Prison. He had gone to the prison earlier in the day to visit his brother Nathan, then returned to the area with two other men in a car. They were there to throw drugs over the prison wall. The two men got out of the car and went to part of the halting site where horses were kept in a pen. On hearing shots, they ran back to the car, which had moved a short distance. They tried to resuscitate Coakley-Hutch, but he died at the scene., having been shot in the head a number of times. He had been warned that his life was in danger.Gardaí believe the killers escaped in a black Volkswagen Golf that was set on fire at nearby Crag Avenue before transferring to a black Toyota Avensis which was found burned out at Snowdrop Walk, Darndale. He had been warned  his life was in danger.Derek Coakley-Hutch had a criminal record, having previously pleading guilty to possession of an imitation firearm during the robbery of a Spar in Styles Road, Clontarf on 11 June 2015.
He had carried the coffin of his uncle, Eddie Hutch, who had been shot as part of the feud. He was also a nephew of Gerry Hutch.


=== National Boxing Stadium shooting, 26 January 2018 ===
A member of the Hutch family was due to compete in a tournament that began at the National Boxing Stadium on the South Circular road in Dublin. There was a heavy Garda presence as a result.[4]
A car pulled up near the National Stadium at around about 9.45pm on the night and fired at a man who is known to gardaí; he was hit in the foot as he ran towards Griffith College.
The second man, who was injured in the hand, is understood to have been a student at the college who had been walking nearby.
Both men, who were aged in their 40s and 20s, were taken to St James Hospital with injuries which were not life threatening.
Two cars were later found burnt-out in north Dublin.


=== Murder of Jason Molyneux, 30 January 2018 ===
Jason Molyneux, a well-known Dublin criminal and friend of Coakley-Hutch, was shot dead at the James Larkin House flats complex on the North Strand where he lived. He had just returned from the wake of his friend Derek Coakley-Hutch who had been shot dead 10 days earlier. The two-man hit team immediately drove from North Strand to the nearby East-Link Toll Bridge and abandoned their Renault Kango van. They returned two hours later and attempted to set fire to it.Molyneux had over 120 previous convictions and was a suspect in a number of murders, including the shootings of Anthony Russell in April 2008, Michael Devoy in January 2014, and Michael Keogh in May 2017.


=== Arrest of two Kinahan associates, 16 July 2018 ===
Two men were arrested in front of the SuperValu shop on Howth Road in Killester. They were arrested by the Garda Emergency Response Unit who found a loaded handgun in their car. The two men, aged 25 and 28, are known by Gardai to be connected to the Kinahan gang and it was suspected that they were targeting a member of the Hutch gang.


=== Murder of Clive Staunton, 15 November 2018 ===
Clive Staunton, a street trader, was shot dead outside his home around 9:15pm.He had been selling merchandise at the Beggars Bush junction before the Ireland v Northern Ireland match at the Aviva Stadium. Normally he sold merchandise before and after matches, but he left during the game. He arrived at his home in the Glen Easton estate in Leixlip around 9:10-1:15pm. A gunman fired shots through the windscreen and drivers window - Mr Staunton tried to escape but the gunman shot him twice in the head. The gunman fled in a silver/grey Volvo 540 which was later found burnt out in Kilbride, County Wicklow.Mr Staunton was originally from the Greek Street flats of Dublin, but had lived in Leixlip for more than 20 years. He as a widower and was a distant relation through marriage of the Hutch family. He had minor convictions for counterfeiting, but was never involved in serious criminality. Gardai confirmed that a link to the feud was one element of the investigation.


=== Murder of Eric Fowler, 22 December 2018 ===
Exactly two years after Noel Kirwan was shot dead, 34 year-old Eric Fowler was shot in the head and killed at his home at Blakestown Cottages in Clonsilla.Two gunmen waited outside the house before running up as he was locking his car. He was shot a number of times in the head and collapsed at the side of the house despite trying to escape. A silver Volkswagen Jetta was found burnt out at Rusheeny Green in Clonee.Fowler had been formally warned by Gardaí that there was a credible threat to his life.
Gardaí said there were a number of lines of inquiry, but it was possible that it was connected to the local criminal feuds in Finglas and Blanchardstown or possibly to the Kinahan-Hutch feud.


=== Collapse of trial of Patrick Hutch, 20 February 2019 ===
The trial of Patrick Hutch at the Criminal Courts of Justice for the murder of David Byrne collapsed in February 2019, after the suicide of lead investigator, Detective Superintendent Colm Fox. An investigation into the circumstances surrounding the death of the Superintendent was launched by the Garda Síochána Ombudsman Commission.


=== Lee Boylan shot, 6 March 2019 ===
24 year-old Lee Boylan was shot three times and critically injured while driving a van on Blakestown Road in Clonsilla close to the scene of the murder of Boylan's friend Eric Fowler over two months previously. A BMW 3 Series that was involved in the shooting was found burnt out on nearby Saddlers Drive.
Boylan was an associate of the Kinahan cartel and it is unclear if they organised his shooting or if the Hutch gang were behind it.


=== Murder of Seán Little, 21 May 2019 ===
22 year-old Seán Little was shot dead and had his car set alight after being lured to Walshestown, a remote rural area off Junction 5 on the M1 on the evening of 21 May. It is understood that Little had links to members of the Kinahan gang and that former associates, including Iranian-born hitman Hamid Sanambar, were responsible for his murder.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Lally, Conor (2017-07-01). "The story of a feud: How the Kinahan-Hutch war escalated". The Irish Times.
McDonald, Henry (2018-02-19). "Dublin's dead men walking: 29 on death list in brutal gangland war". The Guardian.
"Murder convictions and a cartel close to collapse: How gardaí pummeled the Kinahan gang in 2018". Journal. 2018-12-31.
Williams, Paul (2019-07-06). "Gardaí wary of fragile peace as Kinahan-Hutch feud 'appears to be fizzling out'". Independent.