Black Horse Pike Regional School District

The Black Horse Pike Regional School District (BHPRSD) is a regional public high school district serving students in ninth through twelfth grades from Bellmawr Borough, Gloucester Township and Runnemede Borough in Camden County, New Jersey, United States. Students from Bellmawr and Runnemede attend Triton Regional High School, while students from Gloucester Township are split across the district's three schools, based on their home address.As of the 2014-15 school year, the district and its three schools had an enrollment of 3,786 students and 266.8 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 14.2:1.The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "DE", the fifth-highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.In order to graduate, students must pass the New Jersey High School Proficiency Assessment (HSPA), earn a total of 115 credits and pass the following courses: four years of Physical Education, four years of Health, four years of English, one year of World History / Cultures, two years of U.S. History, three years of Math, three years of Science, two years of Visual / Performing / Practical Arts and a year of Career Education. The district's schools offer Advanced Placement courses, Honors, dual credit with area community colleges and cooperative education / work study programs in business and industry. As of Summer 2014, all three schools have a revamped dress code (that bans tank tops and requests that shorts must be mid-thigh at length) and eliminated homeroom.


== Schools ==
There are three high schools that are part of the district. Students from Gloucester Township attend one of the three schools based on their residence. The schools in the district (with 2014-15 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are:
Highland Regional High School - The school is located in Blackwood and serves Gloucester Township (1,236 students)
Elizabeth Petitte, Principal
Timber Creek Regional High School - The school is located in Erial and serves Gloucester Township (1,320)
Kasha Giddins, Principal
Triton Regional High School - The school is located in Runnemede and serves Gloucester Township, as well as Bellmawr and Runnemede (1,230)
Melissa Sheppard, Principal


== Administrators ==
Core members of the district's administration are:
Dr. Brian Repici, Superintendent
Frank Rizzo, Business Administrator / Board Secretary


== References ==


== External links ==
Black Horse Pike Regional School District
Black Horse Pike Regional School District's 2015–16 School Report Card from the New Jersey Department of Education
School Data for the Black Horse Pike Regional School District, National Center for Education Statistics