Puneet Sira

Puneet Sira (born 3 December 1967) is a British and Bollywood feature film director and producer who formed The Film Foundry, his Production Company which is building a slate of original stories that are in active development for feature films and OTT platforms.
Currently directing the Virat Kohli Superhero Animation series Super V for Disney, Marvel HQ, Star TV, Hotstar and Baweja Movies. Season 1 premieres in over 70 countries from 5 November 2019.
Sira's directorial career consists of several feature films: Kisaan (2009) for Sohail Khan Production, starring Jackie Shroff, Sohail Khan, Arbaaz Khan and Dia Mirza and Jai Veeru (2009), starring Fardeen Khan and Kunal Khemu and Dia Mirza.
Sira was honored with an award for directing Kisaan', at the SAFF Film Festival in L.A. in 2009. Sira directed the critically acclaimed film I - Proud To Be An Indian (2004) starring Sohail Khan, Hina Rehman and Tim Lawrence for Sohail Khan Production.


== Biography ==


=== Early career ===
Sira started his career as an actor in the UK at the age of nine where he worked with Rosemary Leach and Ben Kingsley as a beggar boy in Annie Besant, The Warrior's Return(1977) as part of The Velvet Glove series for the BBC, directed by Philip Saville. Puneet went on to star alongside Christopher Lee, Mickey Rooney, Oliver Tobias, Emma Samms and Peter Cushing in the feature film Arabian Adventure (1979). He played the lead role of Majeed, directed by Kevin Connor. In the same year Puneet played Kasava Minor in the BBC series To Serve Them All My Days (1979).
In 1980 Sira was the youngest member to participate in Comex 10, a commonwealth expedition sponsored by Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. Founded by Lieutenant Colonel Lionel Gregory, OBE, Comex 10 was an expedition where 40 artistes from all commonwealth countries toured India performing variety acts in every city visited.
More acting work followed from How We Used to Live (Yorkshire Television), Why Couples Break Up (Yorkshire Television), London's Burning (London Weekend Television), The Moneymen (London Weekend Television), The Park (Regent Productions), The Betrothed (LIFS) and the highly acclaimed Walkers Poppadoms Commercial, The Rocking Sikh directed by Paul Weiland.


=== Film-making career ===
A vast body of work is credited to Sira during his tenure as an assistant director at the BBC Drama Films Department. Sira became an assistant director on films such as Hallelujah Anyhow (1991) (Screen Two) starring Keith David, Sweet Nothing (1990) (Screen One) and Can You Hear Me Thinking? (1991) starring Judi Dench. He freelanced on Flying Colors (1993), Memsahib Rita (1994), Blue Baby (1994) before venturing into directing his own films like Strings (1996) which he also wrote and produced.
Sira was the director of the London Academy of Acting (a school founded by his father, Gurdial Sira in 1970), where he would teach acting for film. He set up an actors' agency, Talent Introduction Centre (T.I.C.), where he provided work for Asian actors in the UK.
Casting director was another title to Sira's credit: films such as Jinnah (1998) starring Christoper Lee, Flight (1992) (BBC Screen One), directed by Alex Pillai, Immaculate Conception (1992) directed by Jamil Dehlavi, Memsahib Rita (1994) and Frantz Fanon – Black Skin, White Mask (1996) directed by Isaac Julien. On the American feature film Passion in the Desert (1997) Sira worked on production.
Sira lectured on basic film making at Middlesex University and Italia Conti Acting Academy as a visiting lecturer.
In 1998, Sira became the executive producer for Rupert Murdoch's Channel V, (STAR TV), producing more than 22 television shows for the channel in Mumbai. He went on to produce and direct drama for television The Steal (2000) STAR TV, followed by Sanatta (2001) and Jataka Tales (2002) for Japanese television which Sira directed and produced with his partner Vikram Dhillon. Sira went on to direct the feature films I - Proud To Be An Indian  (2004), Jai Veeru (2009) and Kisaan (2009).
As a screenwriter Sira wrote I - Proud To Be An Indian with Vekeana Dhillon. Together they have written the screenplay for the feature film Kurbani for Feroz Khan (FK International) and Spiceboy for Miracle Films. Sira had written The Steal and Sanatta.
Sira and Vikram Dhillon are partners in Eyeline Entertainment, a production company which has several feature films in development and pre-production with Ji Karda under production and The Great Punjabi Luv Shuv Story a web series for Ekta Kapoor's digital channel AltBalaji.


== Personal life ==
Sira married Vekeana Dhillon in 2010, an accomplished screenwriter and actress. Vekeana wrote Sira's I - Proud To Be An Indian, Jai Veeru, Kisaan and Super V.
Sira has two children Shaan Sira and Simran Sira.
He is the son of actor Mr. Gurdial Sira (1940–2013) and Asha Sira.


== Filmography ==


== Awards ==
SAFF Awards:

2009: SAFF Award for Direction (Kisaan)


== References ==


== External links ==
Puneet Sira on IMDb
Kisaan on IMDb
I Proud To Be An Indian @ Internet Movie Database
I Proud To Be An Indian @ Bollywood Hungama (IndiaFM)
Jai Veeru on IMDb
Trailer of Jai Veeru