Puneet Singh Ratn

Satya 2 (transl. Truth 2) is a 2013 Indian crime film, simultaneously shot in Hindi and Telugu language. The film was directed by Ram Gopal Varma with production design by Saini S. Johray. The film stars Puneet Singh Ratn (Hindi), Sharwanand (Telugu), Anaika Soti and Mahesh Thakur in lead roles. The film tells the story of Satya, an immigrant who comes to Mumbai aiming to refashion the mumbai underworld. The film is the fourth installment of the Gangster Trilogy.
Director Ram Gopal Verma hinted that Satya 2 will be his last film on the underworld and that now he wants to make romantic movies. Satya 2 was released on 28 October 2013 in U. A. E. and 8 November 2013 in India. The film received mixed reviews, Subhash K. Jha of Bollywood News stated that Ram Gopal Varma returns to form with Satya 2.Samreen Tungekar of Bolly spice has stated "Ram Gopal Verma had made it clear that Satya 2 is not a sequel to Satya, and he has evidently made no attempt of making this film look like a prequel or a sequel too. Satya 2 stands as an independent story and does well for itself as a film." The Telugu version was dubbed in Tamil as Naanthaanda and reshot with Tamil actors.


== Plot ==
The storyline of Satya 2 is narrated by a voice (Makrand Deshpande) about the underworld whose activities have slowed down from the last decade in Mumbai (Hyderabad in Telugu version). The story is based on Satya (Puneet Singh Ratn/Sharwanand) who comes to Mumbai and starts working for Lahoti (Mahesh Thakur), a construction magnate. In trying to beat a competitor in a deal, he gets involved with the mafia and other underworld elements who don't have the clout anymore. Later, he kills RK who is the retired mafia leader and his son since his son wanted to kill Satya due to a feud between them. During this time, he gets his friend production money for a film and gets a flat and brings his girlfriend Chitra (Anaika Soti) to live there. He makes enemies all around and in a shootout with cops, loses his girlfriend and also his friend. But, even thought he is captured, he is able to get out of jail through the Company he creates with his connections and begins his reign as the newest underworld leader in Mumbai/Hyderabad.


== Cast ==
Puneet Singh Ratn (Hindi) / Sharwanand as Satya Prakash "Satya" (Telugu)
Anaika Soti as Chitra
Mahesh Thakur as Lahothi (Hindi version) / Eshwar Rao (Telugu version)
Amitriyaan as Naara
Raj Premi as RK
Amal Sehrawat as TK
Ashok Samarth as Solomon
Kaushal Kapoor as Purshottam
Vikram Singh as Anna
Suresh as Subramanyam (Telugu version)
Ajay Rathnam as Sambasiva Rao "Samba"
Shanmugarajan as Police Officer (Telugu version)
Anjalie Gupta as Special (as item number)Tamil versionThalaivasal Vijay
Radha Ravi


== Development ==


=== Context ===
"All this was in the early eighties and we are now in 2013 and since there is almost no underworld now, it is clear that there's a vacuum and whenever there's a vacuum in any lucrative business there will always be an entrepreneur to step in.
If Satya was a story of a man who came in 1998 and shaped the then existing underworld, 'Satya 2' is about another man who comes in 2013 to reinvent the underworld. To that extent I would say this is a futuristic film not in terms of science fiction but in terms of that there's no precedent for the protagonist of 'Satya 2'. He starts a new underworld company based on his study of the mistakes of all the earlier dons and also on the ways he develops to deal with the modern day policing methods" said Ram Gopal Varma.
"The police is completely caught off guard by this never before experienced menace of the new Company and the reason for this is that the police will always be lesser than a criminal enterprise in their vision ...That is because the police is merely an evolved system whereas a criminal entrepreneur for want of a better word is a visionary in his own field. Only after a new kind of crime happens will the police learn how to contain or prevent it. So it follows that if a completely new kind of a criminal appears on the horizon, their past experience will be null and void and they will again have to start from scratch
So in one line 'Satya 2' is about a man whose thinking starts where the earlier Dons thinking ended and where the police cannot even begin to think." said Ram Gopal Varma.


== Production ==
"As a film maker I have been doing a deep study of the underworld and its gangsters for more than two decades primarily for the purposes of gathering subject matters for my films and to get inspired for characters from real life references..And that's how films like Satya and company happened... Then one day it occurred to me what if a guy out there studied the same gangsters not for becoming a film maker but for the purpose of becoming a gangster himself.it's that idea of mine which finally shaped itself into Satya 2. A new age gangster will obviously be armed with the mistakes of the earlier gangsters and also with the modern day policing methods". said Ram Gopal Varma. One romantic song of Satya 2 was shot in Kashmir in June 2013. The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) passed Satya 2 with A certificate with 3 cuts. Satya 2 is made within the budget of Rs 15 crore.


== Soundtrack ==
The background score of the film has been composed by Shakthikanth Karthick. The soundtrack of the film consisted of nine tracks composed by Nitin Raikwar, Sanjeev-Darshan, Kary Arora and Shree D and lyrics by Moied Elhaam, Nitin Raikwar, Kumaar, Sonny Ravan and Shree D on 15 October 2013.


== Critical reception ==
Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave it 3 out of 5 stars and stated that Satya 2 has the right elements that make a quintessential gangster film. Madhureeta Mukherjee of Times of India gave it 2 out of 5 stars.The Telugu version released to negative reviews with Sangeetha of The Hindu advising to "skip this and watch the original Satya.


== Box office ==
Satya 2 opened to an average opening-day occupancy of around 5 percent, the overseas market being no different with the film seeing a release in UAE. Owing to this the film had an opening day collections of ₹3-4 million (US$−58,000) with ₹1.5-2 million (US$−29,000) coming from Mumbai itself keeping in accordance with the wide release with the rest coming from East Punjab and DUP with collections of around ₹.2 million (US$2,900) and ₹.5 million (US$7,200), respectively.


== References ==


== External links ==
Satya 2 on IMDb
Satya 2 in Bollywood Hungama
Official Facebook Page
Official Twitter