The Buddha of Suburbia (soundtrack)

The Buddha of Suburbia is a 1993 'soundtrack album' by David Bowie inspired by the four-part television serial of the same name originally shown on BBC2 (itself adapted from the novel of the same name by Hanif Kureishi). Although classified as a 'soundtrack album', the title track is the only song that featured in the programme's actual soundtrack.
Released between Black Tie White Noise (1993) and Outside (1995), the album was produced and mixed at Mountain Studios (Montreux) in Switzerland and, according to Bowie, it took only six days to write and record, but fifteen days to mix because of some "technical breakdowns".


== Background ==
During Bowie's brief press tour for Black Tie White Noise in early 1993, he spoke with Hanif Kureishi, who suggested Bowie could write a soundtrack for his upcoming miniseries The Buddha of Suburbia on the BBC. The music Bowie made were short "motifs - combinations of guitar, synthesizer, trumpet, percussion, [and] sitar." After deciding the music wasn't right for the show, Bowie revisited the new material with Erdal Kizilcay, reshaping the songs by distorting, re-recording, and adding vocal melodies to the songs. Only the title track remained unaltered from the original soundtrack. The album was classified and released as a soundtrack in November 1993.Later in the 1990s, Bowie considered re-recording "Dead Against It", one of the tracks from this album, during both his 1995 Outside and 1997 Earthling studio sessions, but he never followed through.


== Deletion ==
Despite Bowie once hailing it as his favourite album, both the 1993 European and 1995 American releases were deleted for many years. Or, as Bowie put it, "The album itself only got one review, a good one as it happens, and is virtually non-existent as far as my catalogue goes – it was designated a soundtrack and got zilch in the way of marketing money. A real shame."The album was re-issued on 17 September 2007, in the UK and on 2 October 2007 in the US.


== Inspirations ==
On the European version of the album Bowie provides comprehensive liner notes on the themes and production techniques involved, and reveals a list of 'residue from the 1970s' as his inspiration for the songs. The list includes the following references:
Free association lyrics, Pink Floyd, Harry Partch, Costume, Blues Clubs, Unter den Linden, Brucke Museum, Pet Sounds, Friends of the Krays, Roxy Music, T-Rex, The Casserole, Neu!, Kraftwerk, Bromley, Croydon, Eno, Prostitutes & Soho, Ronnie Scott's Club, Travels through Russia, Loneliness, O'Jays, Philip Glass in New York clubs, Die Mauer, Drugs.


== Track listing ==
All tracks are written by David Bowie.


== Personnel ==
David Bowie – vocals, keyboards, synths, guitar, alto and baritone saxophones, keyboard percussion, production
Erdal Kızılçay – keyboards, trumpet, bass, guitar, drums, percussion
3D Echo (Rob Clydesdale, Paul Davidson) – drums, bass, guitar on "Bleed Like a Craze, Dad"
Mike Garson – piano on "Bleed Like a Craze, Dad" and "South Horizon"
Lenny Kravitz (courtesy of Virgin Records) – guitar on "Buddha of Suburbia" (rock mix)
David Richards - programming, engineering, mixing, production
Mike Ruggieri - piano recording
Dominik Taqua - assistant engineering
John Jefford, BBC - photography
David and Anne Hardy (Wybo Haas) - design
Special thanks to: Isolar, all at BMG, Coco & Mabs


== Releases ==
The album was first released in the UK and included extensive liner notes by Bowie that were not included with the later US release.
The album was packaged with an alternative cover in the US and was not released until 24 October 1995 (possibly due to a dispute between Bowie and the music industry).
Arista/BMG released a special edition of the soundtrack in a translucent plastic box, packaged with the Hanif Kureishi book. The catalogue number is Arista/BMG 74321-17822.
Virgin/EMI rereleased the album in 2007. Its catalogue number is 50999 5 00463 2 4/V2-00463.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Buddha of Suburbia Project