Robert Gould Shaw III

Robert Gould "Bobbie" Shaw III (18 August 1898 – 10 July 1970) was an American-born English socialite. He was the only son of Nancy Witcher Langhorne and Robert Gould Shaw II, a landowner and socialite. After his parents' divorce in 1903, he moved to England with his mother, who later married Waldorf Astor, 2nd Viscount Astor.


== Life ==
Robert Gould Shaw III was born on 18 August 1898 in Beverly, Massachusetts. Through his father, he was a grandson of investor Quincy Adams Shaw and cousin of Civil War Union casualty Colonel Robert Gould Shaw. His maternal grandparents were railroad millionaire Chiswell Dabney Langhorne and Nancy Witcher (née Keene) Langhorne.Robert Gould Shaw III's father had a limited role in his life while he had a close, if occasionally difficult, relationship with his mother. His parents divorced in 1903, and in 1904 he moved to England with his mother where she would marry Waldorf Astor, 2nd Viscount Astor in 1906, with whom she had five more children, including the William Astor, 3rd Viscount Astor.After moving to England, Robert Gould Shaw III was educated at Shrewsbury School. He briefly served in the Life Guards but his increasing alcoholism caused difficulty.


=== Troubles and death ===
Robert Gould Shaw III had long had suicidal tendencies and his life mostly went adrift from an early point. In 1931, he was imprisoned for six months for homosexual offences. His alcoholism, the Profumo affair, his mother's death, and the death of his half-brother William in 1966 may have increased his suicidal tendencies.On 10 July 1970, Robert Gould Shaw III committed suicide, aged 71. He was cremated, his ashes are  buried in the Octagon Temple, the estate chapel of Cliveden. John Singer Sargent did a 1923 charcoal portrait of Shaw in his military uniform. His mother gave the portrait to Alfred Edward Goodey, art collector and Shaw's partner, and it was later sold in England in 2011 for £23,000.


== References ==


== External links ==
Robert Gould Shaw III at Find a Grave