Cardinal Hayes High School

Cardinal Hayes High School is a Catholic high school for boys in the Concourse Village neighborhood of the Bronx, New York City. The school serves the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York. It is a member of the CHSAA. It was constructed in the Art Deco style. It is named after Cardinal Patrick Joseph Hayes, a previous archbishop of (Catholic Archdiocese of) New York.


== History ==
Cardinal Hayes was dedicated on September 8, 1941 by Cardinal Spellman. Cardinal Hayes' current rival is Mount Saint Michael Academy. The two schools' football teams have met annually since 1942 on Thanksgiving Day. Cardinal Hayes also takes part in non-annual football rivalries with Cardinal Spellman High School and Archbishop Stepinac High School for the Fathers' Club Trophy and the Father John Dubois Memorial Trophy, respectively.


== Notable alumni ==
George Carlin, stand-up comedian (did not graduate)
Willie Colon, NFL player
Stalin Colinet, NFL player, class of 1992
Don DeLillo, author and playwright
Jim Donohue, standup comedian, author
George Dzundza, television and film actor
John F. Good (1936–2016; class of 1954), FBI agent who created the Abscam sting operation.
Jim Jones (rapper), rapper from group Dipset (did not graduate)
Kevin Loughery, NBA player, Detroit Pistons, Baltimore Bullets, player-coach Philadelphia 76ers
Jamal Mashburn, NBA player, Dallas Mavericks, Miami Heat, and New Orleans Hornets
Andrew C. McCarthy, columnist and former Assistant U.S. Attorney
Bernard McGuirk, executive producer of Imus in the Morning radio and television program
Roscoe Orman, actor (attended briefly)
George Pérez, illustrator and writer of comic books
Regis Philbin, television personality
Mario Runco, Jr., U.S. astronaut and former NASA mission specialist
Bobby Sanabria, American (Latin Jazz) drummer, percussionist, composer, arranger, educator
Martin Scorsese, Oscar-winning filmmaker
John Sweeney, President AFL-CIO 1995–2009, recipient of 2010 Presidential Medal of Freedom
Gerry Ward, basketball player, first-round pick in 1963 NBA draft


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website