Durham railway station

Durham railway station is on the East Coast Main Line in the United Kingdom, serving the city of Durham in the North East of England. It is 254 miles 53 chains (409.8 km) north of London King's Cross and is situated between Darlington to the south and Chester-le-Street to the north. Its three-letter station code is DHM.
It is managed by London North Eastern Railway. Despite its small physical profile, the station is a major stop on the East Coast Main Line and is served frequently by London North Eastern Railway,    CrossCountry, TransPennine Express and Northern trains to a variety of destinations across the country.
Durham is a through station with two platforms and is located on a hill to the north of the city centre. To the south of the station, the railway line is elevated on a viaduct. After a renovation in 2006–2008, the ticket hall is now located in the original stone station building.


== History ==
The city of Durham has been served by four stations, only one of which survives today:

Shincliffe (called Shincliffe Town from 1861): located in nearby Shincliffe, this station was built in 1839 and was served by the Durham and Sunderland Railway, using rope haulage until 1856. It closed when Elvet station opened in the city centre. A second station, Shincliffe, on the Leamside to Ferryhill line, was opened in 1844. That closed to passengers in 1941.
Durham (Gilesgate): opened in 1844, and within the city boundaries, it was served by a branch from Belmont on the Leamside Line, then the main line from London to Newcastle. Passenger services finished in 1857 with the opening of the current station on the branch from Leamside to Bishop Auckland but it continued in use as a goods shed until final closure in 1966. Today it has been redeveloped as a Travelodge hotel, while the serving track was used in the realignment of the A690 Gilesgate bypass road.
Durham: In 1857, a station on the current location and viaducts over North Road and the River Browney immediately to the south were built by the North Eastern Railway, on their Leamside to Bishop Auckland line to Bishop Auckland. The station was redeveloped in 1871, when the North Eastern Railway developed a new line from Tursdale through Relly Mill Junction to Durham, and onwards from Newton Hall Junction through Chester-le-Street to Newcastle Central via the Team Valley. This became the main line, the current East Coast Main Line on 15 January 1872.
Durham (Elvet): in 1893, the Durham-Sunderland branch was diverted from Shincliffe Town to a new station at Elvet, within the city boundary. It closed to regular passenger services in 1931 and fully closed in 1953.On grouping in 1923, the stations came under the control of the London and North Eastern Railway. Passenger services to Bishop Auckland and Sunderland via Penshaw were withdrawn by British Railways under the Beeching cuts, on 4 May 1964.
The East Coast Main Line through Durham was electrified in 1991.


=== Station Masters ===


== Current facilities ==
Today, the station is owned by Network Rail and managed by London North Eastern Railway. It was refurbished between 2006 and 2008 by the operator Great North Eastern Railway and later National Express East Coast, which included a new passenger lounge, toilets, travel centre, glazed waiting area, lifts and shops. The entrance and ticket hall were moved from the "temporary" 1960s building into the original stone building following renovation and repairs. The works were completed in early 2008 and the newly renovated station won "Best Medium Station" and "Overall Station of the Year" at the 2008 National Rail Awards. Ticket barriers were installed in 2009.
After winning the intercity east coast rail franchise, former operator Virgin Trains East Coast  opened an information office on platform 2, added new bench and perch seating and  installed Wi-Fi. In 2017, all ticket barriers were removed as part of Virgin Trains East Coast's franchise commitment.
A Brompton Bicycle hire scheme is planned to open in 2018 - however since the demise of Virgin Trains East Coast the management of the station has since passed on to London North Eastern Railway.
Durham County Council, working with the North East Local Enterprise Partnership, have completed a project to improve cycle routes and pedestrian access to the station from the north of the city. This involved the construction of a new cycle path as well as upgrades to road crossings on Framwellgate peth.
In order to accommodate the new London North Eastern Railway Class 800 and 801 Azuma trains due to enter service in late 2018/early 2019, platform 1 has been extended north to a total length of 230 metres.


== Services ==
General off-peak services
tph = trains per hour,   tpd = trains per day


== References ==


== External links ==
Train times and station information for Durham railway station from National Rail