Moving Mountains (band)

Moving Mountains is a rock band from Purchase, New York. Combining emotional vocals with elements of post-rock, the band has often been compared to such acts as The Appleseed Cast and Thrice.
Moving Mountains was formed in Westchester, New York in 2005 by Gregory Dunn (guitar/vocals) and Nicholas Pizzolato (drums). A self-titled demo was leaked to the public in early 2006 and their debut album Pneuma was released independently in early 2007. Later that year, Frank Graniero (guitar/vocals) and Mitchell Lee (bass) completed the band’s line-up. In 2008, Pneuma was reissued by Deep Elm Records. After much delay, a new EP entitled Foreword was released on December 11, 2008. Their second full-length album Waves was released May 10, 2011 on Triple Crown Records. Their self-titled third full-length album Moving Mountains was released on September 10, 2013 on Triple Crown Records. In October 2015, it was announced that the band is doing a split album with New Jersey-based band Prawn which is coming out on November 27, 2015 and have since released a single from that split.


== Music ==
An excerpt from their Myspace.com profile explains how they approach their musical endeavors: "For some bands, there is a core vision and purpose that shines through from beginning to the end. For others, there is an evolution of an idea, a constant metamorphosis whose end and scope is unknown. For Moving Mountains, the evolution not only encapsulates their music, but a larger overarching concept of what defines ‘Moving Mountains’. That isn’t to say that the Purchase, NY quartet have an artier than thou complex, but it does touch on an evolving aesthetic undercurrent and a belief that a band can create an experiential vision that goes beyond music."
Their influences include Hammock and The Album Leaf.Moving Mountains tracks “Aphelion,” “Fourth,” and “8105” have been used on MTV’s College Life, 16 and Pregnant, and Teen Mom.
“Aphelion” has been used for a trailer for AMC’s television drama series Mad Men.


=== Formation and Pneuma (2005-2009) ===
Their self-released album, Pneuma, was written by Gregory Dunn while he was still in high school. His lyrical inspiration was the death of his friend. 
The track titled "8105" represents the date August 1, 2005 when the band was officially formed by both Gregory Dunn and Nicholas Pizzolato.


=== Waves (2010-present) ===
Waves is Moving Mountains' second full-length album. Drifting from the sounds of Pneuma and Foreword, Moving Mountains wanted to create an album that would reflect how they play live. Waves was also released on Triple Crown Records, the band's new label. Moving Mountains has stated that Triple Crown Records let them record and write the album however they wanted to.
The lyrics were written by Gregory Dunn, some of which, like Pneuma, were again written about his friend that had died. He has stated that this is the last album with lyrics about his deceased friend.
On September 1, 2011, they announced the following:
"We wanted to loop everyone in on some recent MovMou news and goings on. We're all resting at our respective homes across New York and getting used to post-Warped life, but we'll be regrouping this week to begin rehearsing for our fall tour with Thrice, La Dispute and o'brother. This is a tour we're insanely excited to be a part of! We can't wait to get back to some of the places we missed on our spring tour with Biffy Clyro. Once we get our practice space set up, we'll probably begin broadcasting our rehearsals via Ustream like we used too. Unfortunately, our long-time guitarist Frank Graniero will not be touring with us for the remainder of the year. He'll be returning to school this fall as a full time student and focusing on his project Caravela. We wish him the best of luck and encourage all of you to support Caravela by spreading the word and attending any shows near you.
Hope all is well. We're looking forward to seeing you all this fall." -MovMou"
At that point, Josh Kirby, their tour manager, took over the guitar and back up vocals role.
On February 7, 2012 they announced that they will be releasing a new EP entitled 'New Light', which is acoustic re-interpretations of two songs off Pneuma and two songs off Waves. The EP was released on April 24, 2012.
On July 9, 2012, the band announced via Facebook that they have started writing and demoing their next full-length album.  On July 23, 2013 it was announced the album will be self-titled and released on September 10, 2013.
On September 16, 2013, through their Facebook page, Moving Mountains announced they will be playing 3 shows with Caravela, This Old Ghost, and Field Mouse, also saying:
"These will likely to be the last Moving Mountains shows for the foreseeable future. Over the years, we've been insanely fortunate enough to have the support of such a tight knit fanbase, and we can't thank you enough for providing an outlet for the music we've created. We're all planning to pursue other artistic endeavors and look forward to sharing those with you. Thank you for sharing our music, and sharing this entire experience with us. See you this fall", announcing an indefinite hiatus.
In December, 2015, Moving Mountains announced a Split EP with the band Prawn, as well as a three city tour the weekend of December 18 to 20. Cities included were Philadelphia, Brooklyn, and Cambridge. They toured with Prawn and Moneen.


== Touring ==
Moving Mountains has toured extensively since releasing Pneuma, including runs with such bands as Thrice, Thursday, The Fall of Troy, Straylight Run, Brian Bonz, Say Anything, Moneen, Eisley, Pompeii, All The Day Holiday, The Dear Hunter, Prawn, and Polar Bear Club.
Moving Mountains performed at Bamboozle, on May 2, 2010.
On November 3, 2010 they were announced as support for Scottish band Biffy Clyro on a tour of North America.Moving Mountains were announced to play every date of the 2011 Vans Warped tour from 
June 24, 2011 in Dallas TX, through to August 14, 2011 in Hillsboro, OR.
Moving Mountains was announced as support for Thrice on their tour for Major/Minor, along with La Dispute and O'Brother.
Moving Mountains accompanied prog band Coheed and Cambria and screamo/post-hardcore band Pianos Become the Teeth on a short US tour in the spring of 2012.


== Band members ==
Gregory Dunn - lead vocals, rhythm guitar, trombone 2005–present
Joshua Kirby -  lead guitar, piano, backing vocals 2011–present
Nicholas Pizzolato - drums 2005–present
Mitchell Lee - bass 2007–present


== Past members ==
Frank Graniero - lead guitar, backing vocals 2007 - 2011


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Pneuma (2007, self-released; reissue 2008, Deep Elm Records; vinyl, Count Your Lucky Stars Records)
Waves (2011, Triple Crown Records)
Moving Mountains (2013, Triple Crown Records)


=== EPs ===
Moving Mountains (2006, self-released)
Foreword (2008, self-released; reissue 2012, Topshelf Records)
New Light (2012, Triple Crown Records)


=== Music videos ===
"Lights and Shapes" (2009)
"The Cascade" (2011)
"Alleviate" (2012)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Myspace profile
Facebook profile