Biggin, North Yorkshire

Biggin is a village and civil parish in the Selby district of North Yorkshire, England, north-west of Selby. 


== History ==

The name 'Biggin' is said to derive from "'bigging' (Middle English) A building; later an outbuilding, an outhouse."  In 1820 Biggin was said to have a population of 164 people "BIGGIN, in the parish of Church Fenton, wapentake of Barkston-Ash, liberties of St. Peter and Pontefract; 6 miles SE. of Tadcaster, 7 from Selby, 11 from Pontefract. Pop. 164." 


== Population ==

In 2001 Biggin had a population of 117. 29.9% of people living in Biggin were between the ages of forty five to fifty nine and a further 22.2 per cent were thirty to forty four. By the time of the census 2011 the population had increased only slightly to 121. This suggests the area is fairly affluent as over half the population are at or near to an age where they should be peaking in their chosen careers. Only twenty two people are of an age to go to school in Biggin which is an indicator as to why there is no primary school for a five-mile radius.The fact Biggin's population has actually decreased over a century isn't really surprising or significant for a parish of its size as more than eighty per cent of Britain's population now live in urban areas.


== Notable places ==
Biggin is located eighteen miles east of major city Leeds and is also thirteen miles south of York.  Biggin does not have a railway station; there is one in Sherburn in Elmet which is a 3.7 mile journey by car and Church Fenton which is slightly closer at 3.1 miles. Church Fenton runs trains every hour to both Leeds and York, with Leeds taking as little as twenty-eight minutes and York just sixteen  Church Fenton's station is favourable for most Biggin residents.
There are no Primary or Secondary schools within Biggin however there are forty-nine within the Selby district, giving parents a wide choice if prepared to travel.  The most local primary school to Biggin is Sherburn Hungate Community Primary school which is just under five miles away.Oxmoor Lane acts as the main road running through the centre of Biggin. Driving south down Oxmoor Lane will lead you out of Biggin and on to a rural B road the B1222 leading to the A63.


== Politics ==
The local authority for Biggin is Selby District Council.  The management of the region is broken into twenty wards. Biggin, being a small parish is located within the Cawood and Wistow region of the Selby district.  The two councillors responsible for Biggin are Keith Ellis a member for the policy review committee on the district council and John Cattanach who is a member of the planning committee, both Ellis and Cattanach are Conservatives.
Biggin falls into the constituency of Selby and Ainstry.  The seat Selby and Ainstry was added to the house of commons in 2010 after the boundary commission recommended its creation.  Conservative Nigel Adams, who was born in Selby, beat Labour candidate Jan Marshall and became the first Member of Parliament for the new Selby and Ainstry seat, collecting 49.4% of the votes. Previously the seat was named 'Selby' and just represented the area of Selby, it now includes Marston Moor, Ouseburn, Ribston and Spofforth with Lower Wharfedale in the borough of Harrogate.  Some villages in the previous Selby constituency have been moved to the new York Outer constituency.


== Economy and climate ==
The Blacksmith Arms lies in the centre of Biggin along Oxmoor Lane.  It was a former dwelling-house which became a public house after its sale in the late 19th century.  It is currently the only trader in Biggin.  It is a pub with great history to the local area, with records dating back over a hundred years.

Biggin's climate is temperate maritime as it is mild with temperatures not much lower than 0 °C in winter and not much higher than 32 °C in summer.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Biggin, North Yorkshire at Wikimedia Commons