Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America

Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA, pronounced /ˈfɑrmə/), formerly known as the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, is a trade group representing companies in the pharmaceutical industry in the United States. Founded in 1958, PhRMA's stated mission is advocacy for public policies that encourage the discovery of new medicines for patients by companies engaged in pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical research. Steve Ubl became PhRMA's chairman in September 2015. PhRMA is headquartered in Washington, DC.In 2017, the organization had revenue of $455 million, $128 million of which was spent on lobbying activities.


== Leadership ==
George A. Scangos, CEO of Biogen, is chairman of the PhRMA board. Joaquin Duato, chairman of Johnson & Johnson's pharmaceutical division, is chairman-elect and Joseph Jimenez, CEO of Novartis, is board treasurer.Previous leadership includes: John J. Castellani, formerly head of the Business Roundtable, a U.S. advocacy and lobbying group and Billy Tauzin, a former Republican congressman from Louisiana.The company has notably opposed market pricing strategies of Valeant Pharmaceuticals, deriding the firm as having a strategy "reflective of a hedge fund".


== Programs ==
SMARxT Disposal is a joint program run by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the American Pharmacists Association, and PhRMA to encourage consumers to properly dispose of unused medicines to avoid harm to the environment.The Partnership for Prescription Assistance is a program by PhRMA and its member companies that connects patients in-need with information on low-cost and free prescription medication. PhRMA has in 2017 raised concerns over price increases for generic drugs out of patent by the company Marathon Pharmaceuticals over Duchenne muscular dystrophy treatment.The company has advocated abroad in South Africa regarding pharmaceutical drug intellectual property rules.In January 2018, the organization introduced the "Let's Talk About Cost" website, which makes the argument that much of the cost of medication goes to middlemen unassociated with pharmaceutical companies.


== Related Sites ==
Phrma.org
Let's Talk About Cost


== See also ==
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry
Ethics in pharmaceutical sales
European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA)
Generic Pharmaceutical Association
International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Associations (IFPMA)
International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA)
Japan Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association
Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme
Pharmaceutical marketing
SAFE-BioPharma Association (SAFE)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website