Coptis

Coptis (goldthread or canker root) is a genus of between 10–15 species of flowering plants in the family Ranunculaceae, native to Asia and North America.


== Species ==
Selected speciesCoptis aspleniifolia - fernleaf goldthread, spleenwort-leaf goldthread
Coptis chinensis - Chinese goldthread, Huang lian in Chinese (Chinese: 黃連; pinyin: huánglián)
Coptis deltoidea
Coptis trifolia (syn. Coptis trifolia)
Coptis japonica - Japanese goldthread, Riben huang lian in Chinese (Chinese: 日本黃連; pinyin: Rìběn huánglián)
Coptis laciniata - Oregon goldthread: California, Oregon, Washington State
Coptis occidentalis - Idaho goldthread: Idaho, Montana, Washington
Coptis omeiensis
Coptis quinquefolia
Coptis quinquesecta
Coptis teeta - Yunnan goldthread, Yunnan huang lian in Chinese (Chinese: 云南黃連; pinyin: Yúnnán huánglián)
Coptis trifolia - threeleaf goldthread, savoyane, canker-root (Eastern Eurasia, Greenland, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Canada, USA)


== Uses ==
Coptis teeta is used as a medicinal herb in China and the Eastern Himalayan regions of India particularly in Mishmi Hills of Arunachal Pradesh where it is used as a bitter tonic for treating malarial fever and dyspepsia.  It is also believed to help insomnia in Chinese herbology.  The roots contain the bitter alkaloid berberine. Studies have shown that the species has become endangered both due to overexploitation as well as intrinsic genetic bottlenecks such as high male sterility induced by genetic mutations. As a result of the synaptic mutation and ensuing male sterility the sexual reproduction in the species is significantly depressed  The dried roots (goldthread) were commercially marketed in Canada until the 1950s or early 60s, to be steeped into a "tea" and swabbed onto areas affected by thrush (candidiasis) infection.


== Ecology ==
The species inhabits warm and cold temperate forests of oak-rhododendron association. It is occasionally seen growing under bamboo thickets around Mayodia region of Dibang Valley district in the Mishmi Hills of Arunachal Pradesh in India. It flowers during early spring March–April and sets fruit/seed in July–August. The seedlings are rare and are often found germinating on moss laden dead wood on the forest floor or even on moss laden branches of Rhododendron. A new subspecies was recognised in C. teeta by Pandit & Babu and was named as subsp. lohitensis, which is morphologically very different from subsp. teeta and it is geographically distinct and inhabits broad leaf forests in Delai Valley of Lohit district in Arunachal Pradesh, India.


== References ==


== External links ==
Flora of North America: Coptis
Flora of China: Coptis