Cardiff Central railway station

Cardiff Central railway station (Welsh: Caerdydd Canolog, formerly ‘Cardiff General’) is a major station on the South Wales Main Line in Cardiff, the capital of Wales, and one of two hubs of the city's urban rail network.
Cardiff Central is in Central Square in the city centre. It is a Grade II listed building managed by Transport for Wales. It is the largest and busiest station in Wales.
Cardiff Central is one of 20 train stations in the city and one of two in the centre, the other being Cardiff Queen Street, both of which are hubs for the Valleys & Cardiff Local Routes. It is an interchange for services between South and West Wales, and other major British cities. Great Western Railway runs intercity services to London Paddington via Bristol and to Swansea, and regional services to Bath, Taunton and Portsmouth via Southampton; Transport for Wales operates services to many destinations in Wales; and CrossCountry operates trains to Gloucester, Birmingham, Nottingham and Manchester.


== History ==


=== Early history ===
In the early 1840s the South Wales Railway was trying to find a suitable site for a railway station, but the area that is now Cardiff Central railway station was prone to flooding. It was Isambard Kingdom Brunel's solution to divert the River Taff to the west, creating a larger and safer site for the station. The initial part of the South Wales Railway between Chepstow and Swansea through Cardiff was opened on 18 June 1850,  with all trains operated by the Great Western Railway (GWR) under a lease agreement. Through services from Cardiff to London Paddington began on 19 July 1852, when the Chepstow Railway Bridge was opened, completing the connection between the South Wales Railway and the Great Western Railway. The South Wales Railway was absorbed into the GWR in 1863.The South Wales Railway had originally been built as a broad-gauge railway, but on the weekend of 11–12 May 1872, the entire South Wales system was converted to standard gauge.Cardiff to London trains originally ran via the circuitous route via Gloucester and took an average of five hours. This was reduced to around four hours from 1886 when the Severn Tunnel was opened creating a shorter route via Bristol and Bath. In 1903 another shortcut, the Badminton railway line was opened, bypassing Bath and Bristol, and this reduced the Cardiff-London journey times by another hour. By the 1930s, the fastest Cardiff-London trains took around 2 hours 40 minutes, and this remained fairly static until 1961, when the diesel Blue Pullman service reduced the fastest journey time to 2 hours 7 minutes. In October 1976 the current InterCity 125 service was introduced, reducing the fastest journey times to 1 hour 53 minutes.The original 'Cardiff' station as it was then known had four through tracks running through the site, and consisted of two through platforms each with its own bay platform. During the 1890s the station underwent considerable expansion, in 1896 a flying junction was constructed connecting the station to nearby Cardiff Queen Street station, and extra platforms were added to accommodate the new Taff Vale services, bringing the total number up to six.Initially named Cardiff, the station was renamed Cardiff General in July 1924 and then Cardiff Central by British Rail in May 1973.


=== 1930s rebuild ===

Between 1931 and 1934, the station underwent a major rebuild, designed by the GWR's architects department under their chief architect Percy Emerson Culverhouse, the centrepiece of this was a new Art Deco entrance building faced in Portland stone, containing a booking hall and concourse with noted Art Deco light fittings, all topped by a clock cupola. The current Art Deco lamps in the booking hall are replicas of the originals, installed in 1999, having been funded by the Railway Heritage Trust. A GWR war memorial is located at the eastern end of the concourse. The Great Western Railway has its full name carved onto the façade (larger than the name of the station). The rebuild also saw a number of other improvements including the lengthening of the platforms, the widening of the Taff River railway bridge to allow the approach lines to the station to be quadrupled, and the installation of colour-light signalling. The rebuild of the station cost the GWR £820,000 (equivalent to £57,180,000 in 2018),, and was formally opened by the then Minister of Transport Oliver Stanley on 26 February 1934.In July 1934, the GWR began a pioneering diesel railcar service with a buffet between Cardiff General and Birmingham Snow Hill which had only two stops at Newport and Gloucester. This was the first long distance diesel express service in Britain, covering the 117.5 miles (189.1 km) between Cardiff and Birmingham in 2 hours 20 minutes. It proved so successful that larger railcars with more seating and no buffet had to be introduced to cope with demand, and even this had to be augmented by a normal locomotive hauled service. During the Second World War, two such trains ran to and from Cardiff daily. At this time it consisted of a three car train consisting of a standard carriage sandwiched between two railcars, and a stop at Stratford-upon-Avon was introduced.As a result of representations by the GWR, a nearby working-class district, Temperance Town, was cleared during the late 1930s in order to improve the outlook of the rebuilt station.In 1992, the station, its entrances and platforms, became Grade II listed.


=== Cardiff Riverside Junction railway station ===

On 14 August 1893 the GWR opened the adjacent Cardiff Riverside Junction station which had two platforms located to the south of and adjacent to the main Cardiff station which curved away to the south on the Cardiff Riverside Branch, which ran to its terminus at Clarence Road about one mile to the south. Riverside station was rebuilt as an island platform with two platform faces in the early 1930s at the same time as Cardiff General was being rebuilt. On 28 October 1940 Riverside station was formally incorporated into Cardiff General station with its platforms being designated 8 and 9. The Riverside platforms were closed for passenger use on 16 March 1964, but they continued to be used for parcels and newspaper traffic for a number of years after. They were demolished in 1994 after becoming disused.


=== 21st century redevelopment ===
In 2011 it was announced that Cardiff Central would be enhanced with a new platform ('Platform 8') and a new two-storey southern entrance and booking hall. This was part of a £200m regeneration scheme to boost train capacity in Cardiff and the surrounding areas. Work started from June 2014. The Assembly Government committed £7m for the overall enhancements programme

The new entrance on the south side of the station, was opened in September 2015, and the new platform  8 on the south side of the station, opened in January 2017, allowing the number of trains on the busy Cardiff Central to Cardiff Queen Street corridor to be increased from 12 to 16 per hour. This was opened in conjunction with a resignalling scheme in the station, which saw all of the station's platforms signalled to become bi-directional, in order to increase the flexibility of the operations.As part of the redevelopment scheme work began in 2015 on a new public square called Central Square in front of the main station entrance, which will include new office, residential and retail space.The old Grade II listed Water Tower (next to Platform 0 and the River Taff) was repainted in 2012 in the original brown and beige colours of the Great Western Railway.


== Current developments and future plans ==
 
Starting in 2010, a scheme has been underway to electrify the Great Western Main Line and the South Wales Main Line. This will allow the current ageing diesel InterCity 125 rolling stock to be replaced by Hitachi Super Express trains on the London-Cardiff service. Initially the electrification was intended to stretch all the way from Cardiff to Swansea, but the Swansea extension was cancelled in 2017, instead  bi-mode trains will be used on the services which continue to Swansea. Electrification to Cardiff was expected to be completed by 2018, but instead, Network Rail delayed it, with the latest estimates being that it will be completed by late 2019.In 2015, plans were unveiled to substantially redevelop the station in order to cope with the expected rise in passenger numbers, which are projected to rise from the current 13 million to 32 million by 2043. The proposed redevelopment would see an enlarged glass fronted concourse which would leave the current 1930s façade intact.


== Station layout and platforms ==

There are two entrances to the station. The northern main entrance leads to the main concourse and is on Central Square.  Three main city centre landmarks are visible from here: the Millennium Stadium, Stadium House and Southgate House.The southern entrance is at the rear of the station on Tresillian Way, accessed from Penarth Road, where the station car park is found.
The railway lines are above the station concourses.  Two subways, one each at the eastern and western side of the station, run parallel under the tracks linking the two main entrances, from which the platforms are accessed by stairs and lifts, with the exception of Platform 0 which is accessed from the main concourse near Marks and Spencer.

Cardiff Central has eight platforms, numbered 0, 1, 2, 3a/b, 4a/b, 6, 7 and 8. There is no longer, despite signage, a Platform 5; this was a west-facing bay platform situated between Platforms 3 and 4 which was removed in the 1960s. Platform 0, a short through platform at the north of the station was created in 1999.Platforms 3 and 4 are divided into 'A' and 'B' sections and are capable of holding two local trains or a nine car Class 800 train. Other platforms can be used by more than one train, but are not sectioned.
Platforms 6 to 8 at the south side of the station are used by Valley Lines trains between Cardiff Queen Street, the north of Cardiff, the Valleys, and the Vale of Glamorgan.
Platforms 0 to 4 are typically used by longer distance regional and national services operated by Transport for Wales, Great Western Railway, and CrossCountry to destinations including   Birmingham New Street, Bristol Temple Meads, Carmarthen, Derby, Gloucester, London Paddington, Manchester Piccadilly, Milford Haven, Portsmouth Harbour, Swansea and North Wales.


== Facilities ==
The majority of facilities are in the main concourse, including ticket desks and machines, cash machines, an information desk, departure and arrival screens, public telephones, a newsagent, and food shops. The station has the only First Class waiting room in Wales.  Outside, an pay-and-display car park provides 248 spaces.British Transport Police maintains a presence at Cardiff Central.


== Services ==

Three train operators run services to Cardiff Central, a summary is as follows:

Transport for Wales:
Operate frequent local commuter services on the local urban rail network known as the Valleys & Cardiff Local Routes.
Operate regional services predominantly within South Wales and West Wales to destinations including Swansea, Ebbw Vale Town, Milford Haven, Carmarthen, Maesteg and Cheltenham Spa via Chepstow, typically on an hourly or two-hourly frequency.
Operate some longer distance services, including an hourly service to Manchester Piccadilly, and a two-hourly service to Holyhead, both via the Welsh Marches Line. A premium daily return service to Holyhead known as the Premier Service is also run.
Infrequent boat trains to and from Fishguard Harbour, connecting with the Stena Line ferry to Rosslare Harbour in Ireland.
Great Western Railway:
Operate two trains per hour (tph) to London Paddington station via the South Wales Main Line and the Great Western Main Line, one of these hourly services terminates at Cardiff and the other continues to Swansea.
Operate an hourly service to Portsmouth Harbour and an hourly service to Taunton, both running via Bristol Temple Meads
CrossCountry:
Operate an hourly service to Nottingham via Birmingham New Street


== Routes ==


== Incidents ==
On 4 May 1998, eleven wagons of freight train which was carrying iron ore from Port Talbot derailed just east of the station, causing substantial damage to the track, as well as blocking the main line into the station. This caused enormous disruption to the services which lasted for several days. No-one however was injured in the incident.To the east of the platforms, the Valley Lines tracks rise up and cross over the South Wales Main Line using a bridge. Rail services were severely disrupted in August 2012 when the retaining wall between the tracks partially collapsed, spilling five tonnes of earth. The South Wales Main Line was swiftly reopened, but all services between Cardiff Central and Cardiff Queen Street were cancelled, with a replacement bus service operating. It was expected that repairs could take two weeks. There were worries that the bronze medal match in the 2012 Summer Olympics men's football competition, held at the nearby Cardiff Millennium Stadium could be disrupted, but most fans were due to arrive by the main line rather than the Valley Lines. There had been severe congestion at the station earlier in the month due to another Olympic match.In December 2016, a serious accident was narrowly averted by the alertness of a driver. During the Cardiff Area Resignalling Scheme, a set of points had been left in an unsafe condition, and undetectable by the signalling system. The Rail Accident Investigation Branch report into the incident revealed that lessons learnt following the Clapham Junction rail crash in December 1988 appeared to have been forgotten. Excessive working hours and a lack of detailed planning were cited as contributory factors.


== See also ==
List of railway stations in Wales
Transport in Wales
Commuter rail in the United Kingdom
Rail transport in Cardiff


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Walters, Laurence (1995). Railways of Cardiff. Addlestone: Ian Allan Ltd. ISBN 0-7110-2380-8.


== Further reading ==
"Cardiff plan". Rail Enthusiast. EMAP National Publications. October 1982. p. 52. ISSN 0262-561X. OCLC 49957965.


== External links ==
 Media related to Cardiff Central railway station at Wikimedia Commons