Helga (crater) (page does not exist)

This is a list of James Bond gadgets featured in the Bond films, organized by the film eras of its actor.
The James Bond books and films have featured exotic equipment and vehicles, which often prove to be critically useful.
The original books and early adaptations had only relatively minimal pieces like the modified attache case in From Russia, with Love.
However, the gadgets took on a more spectacular profile starting with the film version of Goldfinger, and its tremendous success encouraged the following films to have Bond supplied with still more equipment. For instance, it became an expected scene in each film where Q would present and demonstrate Bond's assigned tools for the mission, and it was a near guarantee that each and every piece would be invaluable to Bond in the field. Bond gadgets became an example of the literary technique of Chekhov's gun. Fans eventually complained that the use of gadgets became excessive in the Roger Moore films, particularly in Moonraker, and subsequent productions struggled to find a balance in which gadgets could have a place without giving the impression that the character unduly depended on them or using stories that arbitrarily included situations that exactly fit the use of the gadgets assigned.This article concerns the gadgets James Bond typically carried on his person, along with gadgets and gimmicks used by allies and villains. It does not include makeshift gadgets or weapons, animals, or general spy equipment and installations such as bulletproof vests, disguises, fake passports, surveillance, secret passages and trap doors, or explosives, unless particularly notable. 


== Sean Connery era (1962–1967; 1971) ==


=== Dr. No ===
Geiger counter
Bond has to request one from Britain before using it to determine the radioactivity of Crab Key, suggesting they were uncommon pieces of equipment. The very first James Bond gadget.
Cigarette with cyanide
Used by the "chauffeur" to commit suicide rather than being interrogated by Bond.
Dragon tank
Tank vehicle equipped with flamethrowers.


=== From Russia with Love ===
James Bond's briefcase

A special briefcase issued to all double-0 personnel featuring:AR-7 .22 calibre survival rifle with infrared telescope and detachable suppressor
Twenty rounds of ammunition for the rifle concealed within the case
50 gold sovereigns concealed within the case
Tear gas cartridge disguised as talcum powder, set to discharge when the briefcase is opened incorrectly.
Spring-loaded throwing knife accessible from the case's outside.Bug detector 
A small device that detects the presence of phone taps
Dagger shoe 
A shoe with a concealed poisoned blade tip. Worn by SPECTRE agents, including Rosa Klebb and Morzeny.  Dagger shoes were used in other non-James Bond films such as The Punisher and The Dark Knight
Garrote watch 
A wristwatch from which a wire garrote can be drawn. Preferred weapon by SPECTRE assassin recruit Red Grant.
Periscope 
A gift from the Royal Navy installed below the Russian embassy. Used to spy on the Russian conference room.
Tape recorder camera 
A small reel-to-reel tape recorder hidden within a camera, used to interrogate Tatiana.


=== Goldfinger ===
Oddjob's hat
Goldfinger's henchman, uses a special bowler hat with a metal ring inside the brim as a throwing weapon. The hat is capable of slicing through stone and metal or breaking a person's neck when thrown hard enough.
Homing beacons
Used to track people. One is placed in Bond's shoe; another is placed on car and can be tracked up to 150 miles.
Industrial laser
Used by Goldfinger trying to kill Bond. Powerful enough to put a laser dot on the moon, but at very close range able to cut through steel. This laser was later used to cut open the vault of Fort Knox. This film showcases the very first of its kind, as this weapon takes on various forms throughout the James Bond series.
Parking meter that releases tear gas
One of Q's gadgets under test.
Wetsuit with bird on top
A wetsuit for snorkeling with a seagull on top.


=== Thunderball ===
Homing pill 
When Bond takes this pill, it emits a signal that can be detected only by a certain receiver.
Remote-controlled doors
Although not a significant piece of technology today, in those times it was new. Used by main villain Emilio Largo to open a secret panel which leads to the SPECTRE briefing room in Paris, France.
Air supply 
A small device that can be carried on the person without notice and when in use, is held in the mouth to provide four minutes of air in emergencies when the user has to go underwater. (Effectively a miniature Scuba set.)
Jetpack
A Bell Rocket Belt jetpack is used to propel Bond into the air during his escape in the opening gambit after killing Jaques Bouvar. Bond uses a Bell Textron jetpack in Die Another Day
Underwater jetpack
Bond is equipped with a jet-propelled scuba tank.
Breitling 'Top Time' Diver Chronometer watch 
with built-in Geiger counter.
Underwater camera 
capable of taking eight shots in succession in darkness using an infra-red film.
Geiger counter camera 
A camera that conceals a Geiger counter.  Bond gives this to Domino to look for the bombs on the yacht.
Miniature flare Very pistol
a pocket-sized flare gun firing a red signalling beacon.
Cassette recorder hidden in book 
Bond uses this to learn that Quist is hiding in his hotel room.
Electrocution staff chair
With the press of a button, Blofeld electrocutes the staff member on the seat which he sits on, then the seat drops down into the floor and comes back empty.
Skyhook 
Comes as a grappling suspender attached to a weather balloon that Bond can attach to his utility harness. With the aid of a specialised aircraft (B-17) installed with specialised braces, Bond and Domino are hoisted up into the air and out of the area.


=== You Only Live Twice ===
Mini-rocket cigarette 
Tiger gives Bond a cigarette capable of shooting a rocket-powered projectile accurately up to 30 yards. Used in Blofeld's volcano to kill a technician standing by the entrance controls to enable his allies to storm the base.
Waterproof body bag 
Used at Bond's own "Funeral", this bag is completely waterproof complete with a breathing mask enabling Bond to breathe while being dumped overboard. The bag is even waterproof enough to allow him to wear a complete uniform before his briefing with M.
Jet Propelled Bullets 
Developed by Tiger Tanaka's facility, these bullet feature extra jet propulsion for added firepower. They however were not used.
Little Nellie (WA-116)
A portable autogyro built by Q Branch, which fits into a small duffel bag and can be assembled or dis-assembled anywhere. Contains machine guns, heat seeking missiles, aerial mines, and rocket launchers
Gyrojet rocket guns 
Prototype guns using a small rocket-propelled projectile rather than conventional ammunition. A limited number were made in real life for trials by the US and British military forces, but the design never caught on, and the guns and ammunition are now very collectible (and therefore highly sought after and expensive).
X-Ray Desk
Used by Osato to identify any concealed firearms that his prospective 'clients' may have.
Poison-delivering string 
Used by a Japanese SPECTRE assassin to deliver a dose of poison from an attic by having it running along its length to land directly in the victim's mouth. Referenced or used several times in subsequent popular culture as well, such as in the gamebook series The Way of the Tiger.
Bo with retractable spear 
used by a SPECTRE henchmen who infiltrated Tanaka's base in an attempt to assassinate Bond.
Lipstick gas
Helga Brant uses a lipstick case to discharge disorienting gas.
Safe Cracking Machine 
A pocket-sized device used by Bond to decipher the combination lock code of Osato's office safe.


=== Diamonds Are Forever ===
Cloning Facility 
Blofeld's cloning facility where he picked candidates to surgically alter to resemble him. The facility contained various gadgets and surgical tools to which Bond later uses against him (which is later revealed to be one of his clones).
Biometric fingerprint scanner
A projector-like device used by Tiffany Case in her Amsterdam apartment to identify her guests. One such example of how this device is used is when she takes the glass which Bond was using, then dusting the surface for a print and running it through the device and comparing it with a known fingerprint sample of her supposed guest.
Pocket snap trap 
A small gadget hidden in a pocket to give a person performing an unwanted search on the wielder a painful surprise.
Fake fingerprint 
Bond uses a fake fingerprint that clings to his thumb to trick Tiffany Case into believing he is Peter Franks.
Mountaineering Pistol
Fires a grappling piton, complete with line; range about 10–15 meters. Also used as an improvised weapon against (a fake) Blofeld.
Electromagnetic RPM Controller Ring
Q created a ring that, when used, ensures a jackpot at any slot machine.
Grappling suspenders 
In the last leg of Bond's elevator-top ride to Willard Whyte's suite, Bond uses the grappling cord built into his suspenders. The gadget's design is similar to that of the belt in For Your Eyes Only and GoldenEye.
Voice changer 
Blofield uses this to trick employees that he is Willard Whyte. Q puts together a makeshift one to fool Blofield, remarking that he made one for "the kids last Christmas."
Elevator with trap door 
Used by Blofeld in Willard Whyte's building to incapacitate Bond. A spray of white smoke is emitted from the ceiling of the elevator rendering the occupant unconscious. A version of this elevator is used by villain Karl Stromberg in his sea lair where the floor separates ejecting the occupant into the shark tank (from the film The Spy Who Loved Me).
Water Sphere 
Used by Bond to "walk" on water when he is parachuted near Blofield's platform.
Fake Muffler 
One of the smugglers in the Diamond smuggling ring used a fake motorcycle muffler, which was actually a storage compartment for the diamonds. This man was later killed by Mr. Wint.
Scorpion 
Not a gadget, but used as one. Used by Mr. Wint to kill one of the Diamond Smugglers
La Bombe Surprise 
"Cake" with an "explosive filling", actually a domed shell covered in cake icing covering a small explosive device with a timer. Used by Mr. Wint and Mr. Kidd, and unsuccessfully deployed against Bond. The bomb ended up being tied to Mr. Wint's rear end and tossed overboard, with explosive results.
Flaming Shiskabob 
Not a gadget, but used as one. When exposed by James Bond to be the assassins responsible for eliminating everyone in the diamond operation, Mr. Kidd then takes a pair of Shiskabobs and lights them on fire with the intent of using them as weapons. Unfortunately, this plan backfires massively, as Bond throws alcohol through the Shishkabobs and onto Mr. Kidd, instantly setting him on fire.
World's Greatest Marching Band Cassette Tape 
Tape used to control the laser satellite's movements.
Industrial Satellite Laser 
The final product of all the diamond smuggling throughout the movie. Built by light refraction expert Dr. Metz, this laser is activated by using several hundred diamonds to concentrate and amplify a laser beam strong enough to destroy ICBM facilities, submarines, and other strategic targets from outer space orbit. Blofeld uses this device to extort money from Washington DC. Similar devices appear in Goldeneye and in Die Another Day which are satellite weapons deployed from outer space. This device is also similar to most other laser devices throughout the Bond film series, with this one being the largest and most powerful laser to date.
Blofeld's Mini-Sub/Wrecking Ball 
Suspended on a Crane intended to be lowered down into the water, this was Blofeld's escape vehicle should his plan fail (and it does). Bond however intercepts Blofeld's escape and uses this Mini-Sub still suspended on a crane as a wrecking ball with Blofeld still inside the sub.


=== Never Say Never Again (non-Eon; 1983) ===
Pen gun 
A fountain pen emblazoned with the Union Flag of the UK that can fire an explosive charge, albeit delayed.
Rolex Wristwatch 
Equipped with a small laser beam cutting tool.
Motion-sensing bomb 
Actually Bond's cigarette case, supposedly equipped with a gyroscope that would trigger the detonator when moved. Used to fool a henchman into letting 007 crash Largo's charity ball. This was the only time Bond improvised by inventing a fake gadget on the spot.


== David Niven era (1967) ==


=== Casino Royale (non-Eon; 1967) ===
Cigarette gun 
Similar to the one used in the later Eon movie You Only Live Twice. Used by James Bond to kill the firing squad that tried to execute him in one scene.
Sleeping pills. 
Although these are used in hospitals today, Miss Goodthighs tried to knock out Evelyn Tremble before he could play baccarat against Le Chiffre.
Suit with various gadgets in the pockets 
Q tries to explain this to Evelyn Tremble, but he ignores him.
Le Chiffre's torture room 
Le Chiffre uses this to torture Tremble to get the cheque to his winnings.
Bagpipe with hidden machine gun. 
Used by Vesper Lynd to kill Tremble.
Minox B 8x11 Camera 
Used by Q.


== George Lazenby era (1969) ==


=== On Her Majesty's Secret Service ===
AR-7 .22 Survival Rifle
in the pre-credits opening scene, Bond opens the glovebox of his Aston Martin revealing a stored AR-7 buttstock (its barrel and receiver are normally stored within the buttstock), a detachable suppressor and a rifle scope. He grabs the scope and uses it to watch Tracy walk into the sea. An AR-7 is part of the standard kit given to double-0 agents per From Russia With Love.
Radioactive lint
In the beginning of the movie, Q is showing M a homing device made out of regular lint.
Safe cracker 
A device that consists of a flexible cable ending in a grapple that is meant to be fitted on a typical safe combination lock. The machine would then examine the lock, figure out its combination and open the safe. In addition, the device sports an Olivetti wet-type photocopier that could allow for easy copying of secret documents to minimise the chance of the owner learning of the break in by missing documents. Wet-type photocopiers are actually unsuitable for field missions because they must not be tilted lest the highly toxic transfer liquid spills out. Unlike the safe cracker used in You Only Live Twice, this device was quite slow, taking close to an hour to open the safe (in the film, Bond uses the device while the safe's owner is on a lunch break and barely completes the job before the man returns).
Minox Camera 
Bond uses a small camera to take snap shots of a map that shows where the "Angels Of Death" are to release a biological agent.
Angel of Death kit 
The weapons and communications devices for the Angels of Death, ostensibly presented to them by Blofeld as a Christmas present. It includes a communications device disguised as a pocket mirror (so as to receive messages from Blofeld) and the deadly virus which Blofeld intends to use to destroy all food on Earth if the UN doesn't give in to his demands; the virus is disguised as a perfume spray.After Bond resigns from MI6, we see him cleaning out his desk, and gadgets from past films are shown, including Honey Ryder's knife from Dr. No, Red Grant's garotte watch from From Russia with Love and the miniature re-breather from Thunderball.


== Roger Moore era (1973–1985) ==


=== Live and Let Die ===
Although Major Boothroyd/Q and Q Branch are not present in this film, this film remains the most gadget heavy in the series.

Pulse detonator 
Used by one of Kananga's henchmen to kill Agent Dawes at the UN, by replacing his translation feed with the detonator and sending an explosive noise into his head, killing him instantly.
Rolex Submariner 
This specially modified Submariner has a powerful electromagnet that, in theory, can even deflect a bullet. The watch face also spins to operate like a mini circular saw that can cut ropes.
Bug Sweeper 
a hand-held device that can sweep a room for electronic microphones.
Pre-Recorded Audio Device 
Kananga uses a pre-recorded audio conversation of himself when he knows he's being monitored by the CIA. This allows him to do tasks while Felix Leiter thinks he's giving a speech. Bond uses a similar device later in A View to a Kill
Clothing brush communicator 
A lint brush with a communicator. It can also transmit messages in Morse code.This same prop later appeared (used in a similar manner) in the 1975 Doctor Who serial Revenge of the Cybermen.
Shark gun 
Fires special pellets that expel highly pressurised air to make the target explode. Although it is designed for combating sharks, Bond is able to activate a pellet manually before forcing Dr. Kananga to swallow it.
The 'Felix Lighter' 
Radio transmitter/receiver disguised as a car cigarette lighter installed in a CIA vehicle, which Bond uses to contact his friend, Felix Leiter.
Robo-Samedi 
for unknown reasons, this robotic replica of Baron Samedi pops out of the grave during the sacrificial voodoo scene of Solitaire. Bond quickly dispatches of this fake and the real Samedi appears.
Flute communicator / flute radio
Baron Samedi uses this device as a regular flute and as a direct radio transmission communicator to Dr. Kananga
Voodoo Figures 
Found in the jungles of Dr. Kananga's island, they contain surveillance cameras as well as shoot poison darts at unwanted guests, as well as recently useless agents to Kananga such as Rosie Carver.
Poisonous Snakes 
Used several times throughout the film as weapons or for ceremonial purposes. Comes in many different shapes, sizes, and colors.
Trap Door 
Used in both the New Orleans location of Fillet of Soul restaurant and in "Voodooland" in San Monique to gain entrance to Mr. Big/Dr. Kananga's secret underground lair of operations. The San Monique trap door was initially only used to send the robotic Baron Samedi up through the cemetery to sentence the victim to death by snakes, and is triggered by a hat, a sword and a bell. Bond later tricks the trap door operator with the sword into allowing him and Solitaire inside.
Bulletproof Glass in Taxi 
used by one of Kananga's henchmen to prevent Bond and the recently defected Solitaire from escaping.
Trick Coffin 
Coffin like device with a false bottom that is used to pick up the recently deceased on the ground. Such was used on the murdered MI6 agent Hamilton, who was investigating a Fillet of Soul restaurant in New Orleans.
Shoe Box Communicator 
Used by another one of Kananga's henchmen posting as a shoe shiner in a network of surveillance personnel.
Revolving Dinner Table 
Installed at the Fillet of Soul location in New York, this revolving table brings both special and unexpected guests to the secret back room from where Mr. Big/Dr. Kananga operates.
Prosthetic arm
Tee Hee's mechanical arm which contains a very strong claw capable of crushing and cutting through objects.
Flamethrower Spray Can 
In Bond's hotel room at San Monique, a snake appears. Bond quickly uses his Aftershave can with his cigar as a makeshift blowtorch to kill the snake. This is unusual as it was not a Q branch gadget.
Trap Door Air Vent 
A trap door designed to look like air vent. This device actually employs a low tech solution to killing Bond, which is a poisonous snake. This was completely undetectable by Bond's Bug Sweeper (see above).
Voodoo Hat 
Worn by Baron Samedi and placed as a warning to unwanted guests, this item actually does nothing but scare those who have a bad case of severe superstitious feelings about the item.
Coffee maker 
An ordinary household item which makes M ask "Is that all it does?"
Side Mirror Dart Gun 
Placed on the side mirror of Kananga's Cadillac Eldorado, this device was used to kill Bond's driver in New York City.
Kananga Balloon 
A very inflated version of Dr. Kananga. Bond makes Kananga swallow a compressed gas pellet making him inflate before exploding. There is evidence that this pellet contains helium or hydrogen (a gas lighter than air) as Kananga rises to the ceiling while inflated before he explodes.
Coffin with Snakes 
For ceremonial purposes, a coffin with snakes is present at the sacrificial ritual of Solitaire. Bond quickly tosses Baron Samedi into the coffin, but perhaps to no effect, as he is seen alive at the end of the film.
Airplane with wings torn off 
A small airplane with its wings torn off. Used to evade and chase Kananga's men around the airport. A similar vehicle would be used in the film Spectre.
Monorail 
A transportation system used by Dr. Kananga in his lair to move large amounts of his "shipments" out. Bond and Solitaire later use this mode of transportation to get out of Kananga's lair.
Watertight Metal Containers 
Each container is capable of carrying twenty cans of "shipment" weighing 25lbs each with a total of 500lbs and is watertight. Whisper later finds himself falling inside one of these containers after he meets with one of Bond's signature "Hanging Kick."
Double Decker Bus 
An AEC Regent III RT double decker bus with the top part torn off when driving through a low bridge, which was indirectly used to deter a San Monique police car. Actress Jane Seymour performed her own stunts by sitting in the bus the entire time during the filming of the bus chase sequences.
Baron Samedi 
A dancer masquerading as the voodoo figure to utilize San Monique's fear of the occult. Ostensibly working as a dancer in a voodoo-themed dinner show at San Monique's hotel, he would often leave his hat at certain locations as warnings to certain people. He also seemed to have certain swordsman skills with a machete as well as the apparent ability to cheat death, as he appeared to meet his end by being thrown into a coffin full of snakes, yet he was later seen riding and laughing on the front of the train at the end of the film.


=== The Man With The Golden Gun ===
Nearly all gadgets in this film belong to the main villain, Francisco Scaramanga.

The Golden Gun
Scaramanga assembles his Golden Gun using a pen (which acts as the barrel) screwed into a cigarette lighter (which acts as the firing chamber), a cigarette case (which acts as the handle), and a cuff link (which acts as the trigger). This gun however is limited to only one bullet.
Gold Bullets 
Handcrafted by specialty munitions manufacturer Lazar, these are 4.2mm (an unusual size, slightly smaller than a .17 ACP) and made of 23-karat gold. The bullets flatten upon impact. This action, combined with Scaramanga's extraordinary marksmanship, expedites the rate of death of the victim 
007 Gold Bullet and Bellydancing Trinket Gold Bullet 
Although not gadgets themselves, these pieces of evidence were used to track down Scaramanga. The first bullet, with Bond's Double-O registry etched into it is later revealed to be sent not by Scaramanga or any of his contractors with a hit on Bond, but by Andrea Anders Scaramanga's mistress herself as a way to lure Bond into killing her Lover/Employer Scaramanga and setting her free from his world. Sadly this does not work as she ends up accidentally exposing herself and becomes a victim of one of Scaramanga's gold bullets. The Bellydancing Bullet came from another one of Scaramanga's victims, that being Bill Fairbanks agent 002. Bond tracks down the dancer who used the bullet as a bellydancing stomach trinket that was lodged in the wall after it was used to murder Fairbanks.
Fake Nipple 
Bond uses this as part of his disguise.
Solex Agitator 
Device that enables the utilization of solar energy as a power source on an industrial scale.
Solar Power Plant 
A facility developed by Scaramanga during his apprenticeship with Hi-Fat which utilizes the solar power from the Solex Agitatior. Scaramanga had plans to sell it to the highest bidder before the facility was destroyed indirectly by Goodnight.
RMS Queen Elizabeth 
A fully operational MI6 Facility located within the beached wreck of the RMS Queen Elizabeth. Contains areas to examine salvaged technology from opposing nations, as well as labs for Q Branch.
Industrial Laser Cannon 
A weapon that comes with the use of the solex agitator. Similar to the industrial lasers used by Auric Goldfinger and Blofeld, this weapon was used to destroy Bond's aircraft docked at Scaramanga's island.
Tracking Device 
Used to track Scaramanga's flying car
Scaramanga's Fun Palace 
Filled with replicas of historic figures significant to Scaramanga such as Al Capone as well as several moving mirrors and a Saloon. Also contains a replica of James Bond himself.
Airplane Car Attachment 
A pair of wings, tail section, and a turbine jet that comes as an attachment to Scaramanga's AMC Matador Coupe. Enables his vehicle to fly large distances.
007 Wax Dummy 
A near exact duplicate of James Bond, complete with a retractable railing that at a push of a button would either advance or retreat out of the shadows. Used by Scaramanga as both a tool of admiration and target practice. Bond would later impersonate the dummy and kill Scaramanga when he was not looking.


=== The Spy Who Loved Me ===
Most of the gadgets in this film belong to, or are directly influenced by the main villain, Karl Stromberg.

Jaws' Teeth 
Made of stainless steel, his razor sharp teeth are what he uses to dispose of his victims by biting into their jugular. The strength of these "dentures" are also shown when he is able to bite through the skin of a shark and thus killing it. Its weakness however, being that it is made of steel, is that it is vulnerable to industrial-sized super-magnets which are normally used in junkyards to lift vehicles. In addition to this, Jaws himself has above average at 7'2" as well as above average strength.
Micro-Film Reader 
Assembled from two components:
A cigarette case
A cigarette lighterSki pole gun 
A specially designed ski pole which is modified to fire .30 calibre rounds from a four-shot magazine in the handle.
Seiko Quartz watch 
Basically working like a pager, it had a built-in telex that allowed MI6 to send important messages to Bond, printing them out like a miniature teleprinter. The tape bore some resemblance to label maker tape.
Stun Gas Cigarette 
The cigarette used by Soviet agent Triple X, could unleash a knockout blow of stun gas when blown through.
MI6 Headquarters in Cairo 
Disguised to resemble an Egyptian Temple, this facility houses the offices of MI6 as well as Q Branch division. The following gadgets were all being tested at the Q Branch area of the temple, with only one of them actually being used by Bond in the film. A list of the gadgets being tested is listed below:Sharp Tea Tray
Hookah machine gun
Seats with booby trapped knives
Cement Blaster (later installed on The Lotus Esprit which Bond uses)Lotus Esprit car that converts into a submarine.Sharp Tea Tray 
Although never used, it is shown tested in Q's lab, cutting off a mannequin's head. The tray, in conjunction with a magnetic levitation delivery system, was lethal.
Nuclear ICBM Detonator 
Another Atomic or Nuclear based weapon of mass destruction featured in a Bond Film. This device is responsible for detonating a nuclear warhead in an Intercontinental Ballistic Missile. Equipped with a magnetic housing, Bond had to carefully remove the device which would have been rigged to explode if the Detonator came in contact with the magnetic areas of the housing.
Submarine Tracking System and Microfilm 
The initial object of Bond and Amasova's original mission in Cairo. The tracking system was developed at Stromberg's Facility, but was leaked by one of the developers in order to make an extra profit out of it. Stromberg sent Jaws to retrieve the blueprints to avoid any possible link to his company. Jaws however was unsuccessful in retrieving the blueprints.
SS Liparus oil tanker 
Not really an oil tanker, her massive size contains a launch bay in the fore section of the ship where 3 nuclear subs can be housed. Other high tech toys this ship conceals includes:A mini monorail system from which the cars can be ejected out of a hatch on the side of the ship and convert into speedboats
A bulletproof control room with slots fitted for machine guns and flamethrowers for the Liparus crew to use against the submarine crews
Nuclear ICBM missiles
and the Submarine Tracking and Electrical Interference system used to capture the Soviet, British and American submarines.Monorail Boat 
A mini-monorail car which would ferry people around the large areas of the SS Liparus which turns into a small boat when ejected out of the side of the vessel.
Wet Bike aka "Wet Nellie" 
Built by Q Branch, this Jet Ski that can be assembled and disassembled in a small amount of time, much like the "Little Nellie" gyrocopter from You Only Live Twice and fitted into a small duffel bag when disassembled
Atlantis Sea Base 
Stromberg's main base of operations located off the coast of Sardina, Italy. This gigantic sea base is capable of submersing and re-appearing above the surface of the water. A listing of its gadgets follows:Waterproof Helipad, complete with clear dome that covers the landing area of visiting Helicopters when base is submerged
Sony Surveillance Monitor used to monitor several rooms of the sea base. Comes complete with button panel, in which the red button was used to destroy helicopter containing the inventors of the Submarine tracking system. Other buttons includes the one which operates the elevator the trap door
Trick Elevators with Trap Doors that lead to Shark Tank
Dinner Table Gun
Retracting Paintings that show monitors of Stromberg's Shark Tanks
Shark Tank
Large Aquarium with above average fish and other rare marine life inside
Giant Electromagnetetic Device, located above the Shark Tank for unknown reasons
Escape Pods, complete with champagne and bed
Large Scale Model of the SS Liparus (display purposes only)
Submarine Tracking System (also present in SS Liparus)


=== Moonraker ===
Jaws's Teeth 
With the character of Jaws making a comeback appearance in this film due to his popularity, his trademark steel teeth came back as well. Although hardly used in this film, the strength of his teeth are shown when Jaws bites through a steel cable holding up a Cable Car. He also uses them to open a bottle of champagne for himself and Dolly when they fall back to Earth.
Wrist dart gun 
A dart gun concealed under the wearer's sleeve.
Secret Laboratory 
In Venice, the secret lab in which the nerve gas vials are constructed is hidden by a seemingly normal door on the outside. Accessible by punching in a code on the outside of the door that resembles the tune to Close Encounters of the Third Kind.
Safe-cracking device 
X-ray safe cracking device that is concealed within a cigarette case.
Seiko Wristwatch 
Contains a remote detonator and explosive charge and fuse inside the back compartment.
Multi Purpose Coffin 
Used by Drax henchmen in an attempt to assassinate Bond, this coffin comes with a lid-mounted panel that offers assorted knife weapons the assailant could use against Bond. It also fulfills its basic design as a coffin when Bond kills the assailant hiding inside and closes the lid with the assailant still inside of it.
Hover Gondola 
A gondola equipped with a propeller engine and hovercraft equipment for quick escapes by both land and water.
Camera 
A mini-camera imprinted with 007.
Moonraker Laser gun 
A laser gun that can be shot in space. The gun is also used in the video game GoldenEye 007. A version of this gun is shown being tested to somewhat gruesome effect on a wax dummy during Bond's visit to the MI6 monastery. They were tested at Q-Branch, and used by United States Outer Space Marine Infantry and Drax Industries armaments.
Exploding Bolas (seen tested in the MI6 monastery) 
Designed to entrap an object, such as a human, and explode when the bola balls hit each other.
Mexican Machine gun (seen tested in MI6 monastery) 
A cleverly disguised machine gun which is contained in a mannequin of a Mexican taking a siesta. The mannequin splits open, revealing the gun.
Poison Pen 
One of CIA agent Holly Goodhead's toys. Bond uses this particular gadget to dispose of Drax's pet python.
Perfume Flamethrower 
Another toy of Holly Goodhead
Notebook 
A notebook that shoots a small dart, belonging to Holly Goodhead
Transmitter 
A transmitter hidden in Holly Goodhead's purse.
Drax Space Shuttle and NASA Space Shuttle 
Both of which are equipped with above average weapons such as lasers and infantries equipped with laser weapon technology.
Laser Firearms 
Used by Drax's Henchmen, MI6 Agents training in Brazil, and the US Space Infantry. These weapons fire lasers instead of bullets and is shown to be more effective in Space than conventional firearms.
Cloaking Device 
Used to mask the radar signature of Drax's Space Station. This device was taken offline by Bond and Goodhead, which then gets the attention of NASA and then sends their own Space Shuttle to intercept.
Nerve gas globes 
The staple of Drax's plan to kill all of humanity. Bond accidentally discovers what they are in a Venetian laboratory (he accidentally kills two scientists after removing the nerve gas phial and it smashes). 50 globes are installed on the Moonraker Space Station, to be used to kill all of humanity in a "necklace of death". Three of them were launched; the other 47 were incinerated in the destruction of the space station. Bond and Goodhead take over Moonraker Shuttle #5 and use its laser to destroy the three globes already in space


=== For Your Eyes Only ===
Citroën 2CV 
Melina Havelock's getaway vehicle in Spain  which she and Bond drive after she assassinates Cuban Hitman Hector Gonzales. Its unique shape allows it to survive several tumbles through the mountainside roads, and its small size allows it to be picked up by several people when it flips on its side. The downside is that it does not have a good amount of speed, nor is it easy to drive. The auto company Citroën launched a special edition 2CV "007" to coincide with the film; it was fitted with the standard engine and painted yellow with "007" on the front doors and fake bullet hole stickers.
Colombo's Dove Pins 
A clothing pin with Milos Columbo's "Dove" logo on it. Used by Locque under orders from Kristatos to be placed on a recent murder scene he committed to frame Columbo. This pin was finally used against Locque when he drives nearly off a cliff with his car is hanging on the edge. Bond then throws the Dove Pin that he retrieved from his most recent murder of his contact Ferrara into Locque's car, causing his car to lose balance and fall off the cliff onto the rocks below (with some help from Bond himself kicking the car).
Seiko Wristwatch 
Receives digital message read-outs and contains a 2-way radio/transmitter for voice communications.
"Remote Control Airways" 
Also known as a Remote Control Helicopter, this term was made up by Ernst Stavro Blofeld as he takes Bond on a wild ride in this Helicopter. This helicopter is seemingly an ordinary one, except that it is remotely controlled by Blofeld himself.
Blofeld's Motorized Wheelchair with Helicopter Interface 
Installed on Blofeld's motorized wheelchair, this interface comes with a helicopter instrument panel complete with gauges, flight controls, and TV monitor displays that are used in conjunction with video cameras placed both on the front of the helicopter and one inside to monitor the cabin's occupants. This allows Blofeld to pilot the Helicopter without being inside of it. It also contains a switch which remotely kills the current pilot through an electrical shock to his headset.
Arm Cast 
Developed by Q-Branch, but not used in the field. This would look like an ordinary cast on a broken arm, except that it can also be used on an assailant coming from the back by springing out and bashing the purpotrator.
Table Umbrella 
An ordinary outdoor table umbrella used by Bond as a makeshift parachute to slow down his descent when jumping off a high wall at Hector Gonzales' compound.
Spiked umbrella 
Also developed by Q-Branch but not used in the field, this normal looking umbrella would have hooked spikes come out of the edges and close on the victim's neck when rain pours on the top.
Identigraph
A system used at MI6 to construct the face of henchman Emile Leopold Locque.
Explosive Anti-Theft Device 
Installed in Bond's Lotus Esprit, this anti-theft device provides a warning on the drivers side window not to break it, and a following deadly explosion when someone attempts to break into the car.
Console buttons 
Comes with the rebuilt version of the Lotus Esprit, this time without the Explosive Anti-Theft device. Buttons were never used nor were their functions revealed.
SS St. Georges 
A seemingly ordinary and functional fishing vessel which houses a complete spy facility in its lower decks. This is also where the ATAC device is stored and utilized. The covert nature of this vessel proved useless as both the Soviet Government and Kristatos were aware of its true nature and whereabouts.
ATAC 
The Automatic Targeting Attack Communicator, or ATAC, was lost when the British spy ship St. Georges was sunk. This device controls all of Britain's Polaris ICBM nuclear submarines and can render them either inoperative or co-ordinate the use of them against major western cities or against Britain herself. Later recovered by Bond, who at the end destroys it to prevent it from falling into enemy hands.
Barnett Commando Crossbow 
Melina Havelock, who is there with her crossbow to avenge her parents’ death.
Monitoring Device 
Used by Columbo to monitor conversations between Bond and Kristatos.
Pistachios 
A food item that Columbo smuggles. Also used as a location marker for his men to shoot.
Motorbike 
A frustrated Erich Kriegler uses his damaged motorbike as a throwing item against Bond (unsuccessfully that is). This has a comic effect as Bond was already some distance away as Kriegler attempts to throw it at Bond.
Identigraph 
An early computer-like device to assemble a phantom photo of a person by selecting characteristics from a variety of lists including hair colour, hair style, nose form, style of eyeglasses etc. Located in MI6 headquarters and used by Bond and Q to put together an image of henchman Emile Leopold Locque. This device references the Identicast system referred to in the Ian Fleming novel Goldfinger.
Grappling suspenders 
Similar to the ones used in Diamonds Are Forever, this is used to scale Kristatos' St. Cyril's monastery.
Hockey Team/Equipment 
A seemingly ordinary Hockey team, but in actuality a group of assassins under Kristatos who attempted to kill Bond. They used various Hockey Equipment such as pucks, sticks, and goals as weapons.
St. Cyril's Monastery 
A former Monastery and WW2 Hideout for the allies. Kristatos converted this facility into his personal hideout. Located on a unique rock formation 400m above ground, this Monastery was originally built as a safe haven for the Monks. It comes equipped with a drop basket to ferry people in and out as well as an area for Helicopters to land on.


=== Octopussy ===
Seiko Wristwatch 
Contains a universal radio direction finder. This works in conjunction with listening device inside Bond's fountain pen. The watch is a Seiko G757-5020. This watch contains the following features:Live video feed used in conjunction with Q Branch surveillance cameras.
Homing Device trackerFake crocodile
A crocodile-shaped submersible used by Bond to enter Octopussy's island.
Fake horse trailer 
An ordinary-looking horse trailer, however the rear end of the horse lifts up concealing an Acrostar BD-5J aircraft.
Loaded backgammon dice
Used by Khan to ensure a victory every time, Bond then uses the dice against Khan breaking his "winning streak".
Mont Blanc fountain pen 
Contains a mixture of Nitric and Hydrochloric acids. Contains an earpiece listening device that works in conjunction with Bond's wristwatch and the Fake Fabergé egg (see below).
Attaché case 
Contains a false bottom which conceals a high explosive bomb.
TV Watch 
Receives moving colour images over the air. Bond uses this device towards apprehending Kahn later in the film.
Yo-yo saw 
A rotating circular saw blade attached to a string so that it could be used in the same manner as a conventional yo-yo.


=== A View to a Kill ===
Polarizing sunglasses
Allows the ability of seeing clearly through tinted glass.
Ring camera
Contains a miniature camera.
Zorin identification Device 
Installed within the walls of Zorin's Paris Estate office, this computer integrated system allows Zorin to quickly identify any suspicious clients.
Checkbook/Billfold 
Uses ultra-violet light to read previously written material by picking up the indentations of pen marks on paper.
Zorin Desk Lamp 
Installed throughout the many quarters of his Paris estate. These lamps allow his surveillance team to monitor any conversations made by any of his guests.
Pre-Recorded Audio Device 
Similar to the device which Kananga uses in Live and Let Die, this device uses a pre-recorded audio conversation between Bond and Tibbet masquerading as Horseman and Chauffeur. Bond places this device with the pre-recorded conversation next to the Monitoring Desk Lamp which leads Zorin's team to believe that both Bond and Tibbett are actually in their quarters when they are not.
Electric Shaver 
Contains an electronic eavesdropping detector.
Credit Card 
Has an electronic ability to open locks.
Snooper robotic dog 
One of Q Branch's surveillance inventions. A small, animal-like remote controlled camera unit that can transmit audio/video from the head of the unit to a receptacle for the signal. It was used as demonstration near the beginning of the movie and at the end to find Bond.
Zorin Microchip 
Impervious to electromagnetic pulse (EMP) created from outer space. This microchip or similar reverse-engineered microchips are used on the prototype Eurocopter Tiger helicopter in GoldenEye which is impervious to EMP caused by the main weapon of that film.
Zorin's walking stick
Contains an RC steroid injector used to improve the performance of his racing horses during a race. Also contains various controls for his racetrack and various other materials at his estate.
Razor Sharp Butterflies 
Used by May Day to dispose of Bond's contact at the Eiffel Tower.
Bug Detector 
Just like the one used in From Russia with Love, this is a small device that is designed to detect the presence of a phone tap device in a regular telephone.


== Timothy Dalton era (1987–1989) ==


=== The Living Daylights ===
Whistle-activated keychain
A multi-purpose keychain that can release stun gas or explode. It also has a lock pick that can open 90% of the world's locks.
Cigarette Case Binoculars 
The first of three binocular type devices used in this film. This device is made to look like a cigarette case, but opens up to a pair of small binoculars. Used by both Bond and Saunders to identify General Koskov at the beginning of the film.
Miniature Binoculars 
Contained on normal-looking eye-glass frames.
Electronic Binoculars 
Small Eyeglass frame sized electronic Binoculars with infrared, scanning, and auto-zoom technology. Used by one of Felix Leiter's female agents to scan for and pick up Bond in Tangiers.
Pipeline Escape Pod 
Normally a device used to clean and/or monitor gas pipelines, called Pigging and referred in the movie as a 'Pig'. This one has been refitted to contain one single passenger to travel through the pipeline system. General Koskov was placed inside this pod and smuggled into Austria at above average speeds; Bond says he's the first person to travel in such a manner.
Rake Scanner 
Used by MI6 operatives posing as Groundskeepers on the headquarters front lawn. This device looks like a normal gardening rake but acts as a sensor to monitor the grounds.
Fake Blood Packs and Bulletproof Vest
Used by General Leonid Pushkin, these Fake Blood Packs were used to assist in faking his own death by gunshots. Several of these were strapped to his chest and one small pack in his mouth to fake bleeding in that area. These blood packs came into use when Bond actually shot Pushkin, making it appear that he was bleeding. After faking his death, Pushkin later remarks "thank God Bond is such a good shot"
Ghettoblaster
A boombox that can fire a rocket.
Exploding Teddy Bear 
Pictured but never actually used, this device was the preferred assassination weapon of female KGB agent Natasha Zar who would pose as a child during missions. A file of her and this weapon was presented to Bond by Q while searching for the identity of the female sniper sent to kill Koskov.
Revolving Sofa 
Q is also testing a sofa that swallows whoever sits on it, as demonstrated by one of his assistants.
Guard Wristwatch 
Used by General Pushkin to alert the guards at Bond's appearance.
Milk Bottle Hand Grenades 
Disguised as a Milkman while infiltrating MI6 Headquarters, Necros employed Milk Bottle Hand Grenades from his milk crate destroying some of MI6's internal facilities while trying to smuggle General Koskov out.
Earpiece garrotte 
Not technically a device, but used as one. Necros, disguised as a Milkman, would use this item to strangle his victims much like Red Grant and his garrotte watch.
Trap Entrance Door 
Booby trapped by Necros to kill Agent Saunders. Otherwise a normally working automatic entry door, the trap entrance was rigged with a device that when triggered would deliver a fatal crushing blow to anyone stepping through the entryway of the automatic doors.
Dummy Kara Milovy 
Basically a Cello Case dressed up to look like Kara Milovy in a phone booth. Intended to buy Bond and Milovy time to escape those who were pursuing them.
Bond's explosive 
Used by Bond in an attempt to blow up the opium plane. Defused when Bond had to seal himself inside, but rearmed and used to stop the Soviets destroying Kamran's lair.
Rifle with Shields 
Equipped with the "latest body armor," this rifle had a bulletproof transparent plexiglass shield that covered the upper torso and face of the gunman using it. Bullets shot from Bond's Walther PPK was unable to pierce through its shield.
General Whittaker's War Room 
A room full of deadly "toys" that Whittaker plays with in his spare time. This room contains above average weaponry from the Black Market as well as small detailed replicas of historic battles in which he would decide the outcome. Also present are busts of historic military commanders such as Napoleon Bonaparte and Arthur Wellesly, a.k.a. the 1st Duke of Wellington.
Bust of Arthur Wellesly 
A heavy stone bust of General Wellesley. Not technically a gadget, but when combined with Bond's explosive keychain, it becomes a lethal killing device which kills General Whittaker by falling on him.
Aston Martin V8 Vantage 
A convertible, it is later "winterised" with a hardtop. It comes with all the usual refinements, including:Extending side outriggers
Spike-producing tires, to grip on snow or ice
Missiles concealed behind the forward fog lights
Lasers concealed in the hubcaps (an update of the DB5's tyre-slashers)
Signal-intercepting smart radio
Heads-up display
Rocket propulsion concealed in the boot
Self-destruct button and timer
An unintentional gadget was used by Bond after one of the tyres got shredded; the hubcap can be used to cut through the surface of a frozen lake


=== Licence to Kill ===
Dentonite toothpaste 
Plastic explosives disguised as ordinary toothpaste. The receiver that picks up the signal from Bond to blow the explosives is disguised as a packet of cigarettes.
Signature Camera Gun 
A camera that when put together became a sniper rifle that can be programmed to fire for only one person due to a scanner built into the grip.
Laser Polaroid camera 
When the flash is used on this camera, it shoots a laser. It can also take x-ray pictures.
Exploding Alarm Clock 
Q carries it with him to Isthmus, but it is not used. "Guaranteed never to wake up anybody who uses it."
Broom radio
used by Q to communicate with Bond's companion while disguised as a grounds man. Q throws this item away after using it.
Genuine "Felix" Lighter 
A gift from Felix Leiter's wedding, an inscribed cigarette lighter that malfunctions, causing a huge flame to burst forth (although it could be that it is a mini-flamethrower). It is first and the final special device used in this film reminding the main villain Franz Sanchez why he destroyed his criminal empire to begin with. Bond uses to kill Sanchez, by setting him on fire after his body is coated in petrol. This item is different than the similarly named "Felix Lighter" used in Live and Let Die.
Manta Ray over-cover 
used to disguise Bond as a Manta Ray when infiltrating Krest's ship
Decompression Chamber 
Used for deep sea divers to help them decompress after diving in deep waters, this device was also used as a weapon of execution by Sanchez. Milton Krest's ship, the Wavekrest, had one, and was used by Bond to frame Krest for stealing Sanchez' money. Krest then found out the hard way how a Decompression chamber could be used as a weapon, as he was stuffed in it and Sanchez rapidly compressed and decompressed it, which caused Krest to messily explode everywhere.
Petrol with Cocaine 
Disguised as Gasoline, Sanchez planned to sell his drugs to the orientals disguised as gasoline, but really containing the cocaine.
Ninjas 
A small group of Ninjas were used to capture Bond and send him back to Headquarters. They had small smoke bombs as well as nets that they shot out of their wrists.
Conveyor Belt & Shredder 
Used to break apart large blocks of cocaine into smaller pieces. Dario nearly kills Bond with the Shredder, however with Pam Bouvier's help, Bond tosses Dario into the Shredder.
Decorative stone dolphin 
Technically not a gadget, as it is simply a decorative stone dolphin with a light in its eye, for the swimming pool seen at the end of the film. It is seen 'winking' at the viewer at the very end (with the help of a motorised shutter going over the light)
Helicopter landing tunnel 
A massive, vertical, steel tunnel which allows helicopters to take off and land at Sanchez's drug refinery. Its entrance is disguised by a gigantic panel operated by hydraulics whilst the rest of the tunnel is hidden by Professor Butcher's meditation retreat.


== Pierce Brosnan era (1995–2002) ==


=== GoldenEye ===
Belt
A size 34 leather belt. It conceals a piton gun hidden behind the buckle. It can fire out up to 75 feet (23 m) of high tensile wire designed to support the weight of an average person. Used by Bond to flee the Russian military archives building in St. Petersburg after Natalya is captured by General Ourumov and his men.
Ballpoint pen (Parker Jotter)
Contains a class-four grenade. A four-second fuse is armed after three clicks in succession. Another three clicks disarms it. Used by Bond to escape his captors after Boris nervously clicks it.
Wristwatch 
An Omega Seamaster Professional (the first of James Bond's non-Seiko/Rolex gadget watches) with built-in laser cutter and a remote detonator.
Eurocopter Tiger
A standard Eurocopter Tiger, but equipped with anti EMP technology. It is possible that this helicopter utilizes Zorin Microchip technology from A View to a Kill
Digital binoculars
Auto focus/zoom, digital camera, satellite uplink to send visual data.
X-ray document scanner
Q has a document scanner disguised as a tea-tray.
Phone booth trap
Q Branch is testing a BT telephone box with a large airbag inside which expands and crushes the person inside.
Wheelchair and leg cast missile
Tested by Q Branch, this gadget was made to look like someone had broken their leg, when in fact, the leg hid a missile, which could be fired from the seated position.
Door decoder
Small device that can be fitted onto keypad locked electronic doors that finds the combination and displays it on its screen. Used by 006 in the pre-credit sequence.
Ejector seat
An ejector seat disguised as an ordinary office chair. Adjusting it will blast the chair across a distance. Is only seen whilst Q is telling Bond to bring everything back in pristine condition.
Goldeneye satellite
An orbital satellite based weapon capable of delivering high powered electro-magnetic shock waves which can shut down any electronic operation on Earth. Alec Trevalyan controls the satellite in Cuba with the intention of using it on London, ruining its economy and thus causing chaos (only after he's robbed the entire Bank of England through his hacker employee Boris Grishenko).
Trevelyan's Cuban radar dish base
A gigantic radar installation used by Trevelyan to control the movements of the Goldeneye satellite. The radar dish alone is so large that when submerged in water, it would resemble a small lake thus concealing its whereabouts. This facility comes complete with surface-to-air missiles that would destroy any unwelcomed visitors from the air while submerged. This is similar to Blofeld's volcano base where the outer cover of the retractable roof is painted to resemble lake water. The dish used in the movie is an actual working radio telescope: the Aricebo telescope in Puerto Rico. It was also featured in Contact.
Salad-filled baguette
An ordinary baguette which Bond mistakes for a gadget, before Q reveals that it is his lunch.


=== Tomorrow Never Dies ===
Ericsson JB988 (mobile phone)
This was a concept phone designed by Ericsson. The phone had a variety of features, including:a stun gun, containing a 20,000 Volt shock to any unauthorised user, and is also handy at disabling a high tech door lock.
a fingerprint scanner/analyser/transmitter that can also be used for opening high-tech fingerprint-identification locks
Antennae lock pick, which detaches from the phone and when inserted into a keyhole, hitting a key on the phone can then open the lock.
"Flip-open" remote control for operating his BMW 750iL (Directional steering pad, LCD monitor for the front and rear view, controls to fire rocket launcher and operate the car's other defence mechanisms)
Much of the phone's style, including its "flip-open" design, was incorporated a few years later into the Ericsson R380, an early smartphone. The R380 combined a fully functional mobile phone, PDA-like tools and WAP services.
Omega Seamaster watch
Taken by Bond from the Chinese safehouse, the watch had a small, detachable charge that could be detonated by turning the watch's dial. It was later used to remotely destroy a glass jar that had a grenade lodged inside.
Cigarette lighter
A disguised timed explosive/grenade.
Spike fan
Weapon developed by Wai Lin's counterpart division to Q Branch. Appears to be a Chinese fan, but when opened, several metal spikes with strings attached are thrown. Due to its brief appearance with no additional explanation, it is unclear whether the strings are for entanglement or a similar purpose like a taser, or to retract the spikes.
Rickshaw defence mechanism
This was used to knock out an enemy. A button is pressed, and an upper part of a bike-based rickshaw, which appears to be parked, ejects, knocking out the target.
Dragon flamethrower
Bond commented on the fact that this device was "very novel." Although this appears to be a sculpture of a dragon's head, pulling back one of the horns emits a high yield flamethrower, which makes the sculpture look like a fire-breathing dragon.
Wristband grappling hook
A wristband that shoots a grappling hook that Wai Lin uses to escape a building in the beginning
Earring lock pick
At least one of Wai Lin's earrings conceals a lock pick, which she uses to escape from a pair of handcuffs.
Sea-Vac drill
Used by Elliot Carver to destroy anything in his path—only to fall victim to it himself.


=== The World Is Not Enough ===
Omega Seamaster wristwatch
Contains a grappling hook with fifty feet of high-tensile micro-filament and a high intensity lighted bezel.
Multifunction lock pick
Concealed in a normal-looking credit card with a removable strip that activates a spring-loaded multifunction lock pick.
Explosive eyeglasses
Remotely detonates a flash-bang. The explosive charge is actually housed in the pistol that is confiscated from Bond in the film's opening scene.
X-ray eyeglasses
Enables X-ray vision for checking for concealed weapons.
Avalanche ski jacket
Inflates into a sealed sphere.
Bagpipe flamethrower and machine gun
Was seen only in Q's testing lab.
DIY nuclear bomb
Six kilograms of weapons-grade plutonium (half the plutonium contents of a nuclear bomb), melted into a reactor rod, and attempted to be detonated, by Renard, through the use of a submarine's nuclear reactor, to allow Elektra King to monopolise the oil market.
Nuclear warhead tracking microchip
Used by M when captured by Electra King by hooking up an alarm clock's small battery to the GPS emitter intended to track a nuclear weapon, she was able to alert MI6, thereby triangulating the signal to the lighthouse and get Bond to come to the rescue
Thermo satellite locator
Used by MI6 and operated by R (Q's replacement) to locate Bond and Dr. Christmas Jones in Istanbul after Bond destroys the nuclear submarine. This device uses satellite thermo-imaging on a large display screen to show heat signatures coming from various objects including people. MI6 staff was treated to a surprise when they did finally find Bond and Dr. Jones on their thermo-locator.
Industrial-sized circular saw
Helicopter mounted circular saw assembly. Helicopters carrying these fly by and trim tree foliage. Two of these helicopters are sent to attack Bond and destroy his BMW.
Garrotte chair
A chair which can hold a person at their neck, torso, wrists and ankles. Equipped with a seemingly-harmless knob at neck level, which can kill somebody slowly and painfully, as Bond nearly found out, if not for Zukosky's intervention.
Walking stick gun
A seemingly ordinary ornate-looking walking cane used by Valentin Zukosky. Doubles as a gun with a trigger built into the handle. Used by Zukovsky to rescue Bond from the garotte.This film marks the only one occasion in the Bond film series where Bond has expressed concern as to what Q will think when equipment is destroyed "Q's not gonna like this!" when his BMW Z8 is sawn in half. This takes place after Major Boothroyd's final appearance in the film series; Desmond Llewelyn was killed in a car accident before the next film began production.


=== Die Another Day ===
Single Digit Sonic Agitator 
A "standard issue" ring for the finger which is actually an "ultra high-frequency single digit sonic agitator unit" that can shatter bullet-proof glass (or any " 'unbreakable' glass", as commented by Q in the movie) or disable another person.
Surfboard 
Contains a sliding panel with a hidden compartment containing communications equipment, explosives, detonators and a Walther P99 pistol.
Omega Seamaster Wristwatch 
Omega Seamaster 300M Chronometer - Contains an explosive detonator and laser beam cutter. The new Q states that this watch is Bond's 20th, which is a reference to the fact that Die Another Day is the 20th James Bond film.
Dream simulator
Toby Graves uses this device to have dreams as he has insomnia.
Mini Air Supply 
Similar device as used in Thunderball, which provides a few minutes of oxygen.
Virtual Combat Training Simulator
This device allows the user to enter a virtual environment with the assistance of four computerised columns, a special pair of sunglasses, and a special weapon. This training simulator is tested by 007. One such program contains a scenario in which MI6 Headquarters is attacked and the user must eliminate all threats as they see fit. Miss Moneypenny makes some recreational use of another version of the program, where she is romancing with James Bond over a desk.
Invisible car
Uses cameras and small screens to cloak itself.


== Daniel Craig era (2006–present) ==
Since the reboot of the franchise with Casino Royale, the character of Q and his lab had been absent from the films until Skyfall.


=== Casino Royale ===
Sony Ericsson K800 
Mobile phone with sophisticated GPS and 3.2 megapixel digital camera, with the ability to take multiple pictures very rapidly.
Sony Ericsson M600
Microchip implant 
Bond is implanted with a microchip that helps MI6 keep track of Bond's whereabouts; it also monitors Bond's vital signs which are transmitted back to MI6 for analysis.
Tracking device 
Similar to the implant in Bond's arm, this tracking device is placed in Le Chiffre's inhaler.
Omega Seamaster wristwatch 
Omega Seamaster Planet Ocean and Omega Seamaster Professional 300M.
Explosive keychain 
Originally used in the attempt to destroy a commercial airliner in Miami. The detonator for the explosive is concealed in a cell phone. Bond removes this from the fuel lorry and attaches it to Carlos' belt loop. Carlos then realises, too late, that he is about to explode.
Defibrillator in glove compartment


=== Quantum of Solace ===
Walther PPK 
The Walther PPK returns, after having been replaced at the end of Tomorrow Never Dies by the P99.
Sony Ericsson C902 
This mobile phone has a built in identification imager, capable of compiling a composite facial image of a potential suspect even when the person being photographed is looking to the side. This phone can also receive information immediately regarding the suspect as it is also tied into the MI6 data mainframe.
Omega Seamaster wristwatch 
Omega Seamaster Planet Ocean
MI6 Profile Touchscreen / multi-touch table 
Similar to the Microsoft Surface, this tool used by MI6 gathers information regarding possible suspects in an investigation, and relays it back to Bond through his mobile phone.
Quantum Earpiece 
A Q-shaped earpiece that 007 uses to listen in on Dominic Greene and his plots.


=== Skyfall ===
Walther PPK/S 9mm short 
A version equipped with a palm-print reader, only enabling the gun to fire when it detects Bond's palm-print.
Radio transmitter 
A simple radio transmitter that allows MI6 to track Bond's location when activated. Bond expresses his disappointment at the poor selection of gadgets at his disposal from the new Q (Ben Whishaw), who explains that Q branch no longer go in for "exploding pens". Regardless, that simple gadget proves invaluable when it secretly leads M.I.-6 to Silva's lair where he is holding Bond prisoner.
Sony Xperia T
Omega Seamaster wristwatch 
Omega Seamaster Planet Ocean and Omega Seamaster Aqua Terra
Lightbulb Bombs 
Built by M herself, these self-made explosive devices contain a broken lightbulb inside a small plastic bag filled with kerosene and small bits of screws and other small bits of scrap metal. When attached to a light bulb socket and switched on by intruders, they explode sending large flames and bits of scrap metal flying everywhere.
Hunting knife 
Provided as a melee weapon by Skyfall's groundskeeper Kincade, for old-fashion means should Bond fail with the rest of his arsenal. He later uses it to kill Raoul Silva, by throwing it into his back.
Internet messages 
Sent by Silva to M's computer. One was a superimposed black-and-white photo of M on the Union Flag, the other was a one-armed bandit casino machine which showed five skulls, before showing M a YouTube video of five exposed MI6 agents, and the threat of "five more, every week". Both carried the same stark message: "Think On Your Sins".
Silva's prosthetic 
A prosthetic device used by Silva to mask his deformed face following his suicide attempt in 1997 when he was exchanged to the Chinese, under M, in exchange for other MI6 agents' release. The device chiefly consists of a denture for Silva's upper jaw, masking his rotten teeth, as well as a titanium arm that inflates his sunken left cheek and drooping eyelid on the same side, as well as presumed inbuilt devices to give him a Hispanic tan, help him breathe with inhalers and help him speak with an Electrolarynx.


=== Spectre ===
Smart blood
Implanted into Bond, the nanoparticles allows Q Branch to monitor his whereabouts via Satellite GPS.
Omega Seamaster wristwatch 
Omega Seamaster 300 (special Spectre limited edition) with two-tone NATO strap. Built in explosive charge with a one-minute timer. The real watch is magnetic-resistant up to 15,000 Gauss
SPECTRE ring 
When analyzed by Q, it revealed data information about the Spectre organization. The ring is also used by members to gain admission to staff meetings.
L'Americain Hotel Secret Room 
A room of operations built by Mr. White in a Hotel room. The room contained various gadgets and information he used while working with Spectre. It also provided the co-ordinates to the Spectre base in Morocco.
Dentist Chair 
Containing two small drills that Blofeld uses remotely to drill into Bond's head (non fatally). Also comes with an X-Ray monitor.
Nine Eyes Surveillance System 
An automated surveillance technology system secretly funded by Spectre and used by "C" (head of Joint Intelligence Services) as a means of creating an intelligence network between the United Kingdom and eight other countries. Also as a means of ending the Double 0 program and securing Spectre from their threats as well as gathering information for that organization.
Spectre Facility Morocco 
Spectre's base of operations in the Moroccan Desert. Built into a meteor crater, this facility's decor resembles that of the Eco Hotel from the film Quantum of Solace. This facility possibly contains more gadgets.
Beer Kegs 
Not technically a gadget but used as one. Bond attaches a chain to Mr. Hinx that linked a series of Beer Kegs as they were being dropped out of a moving train, thus taking Mr. Hinx with him.
Laser microphone attached to Bond's SMG in operation in Mexico.
Mr. Hinx's thumbnails 
Metal thumbnails on Mr. Hinx's thumbs. Served no apparent purpose other than for aesthetic and decorative reasons.


== See also ==
List of James Bond vehicles
Outline of James Bond


== Other media ==
James Bond Gadgets: Discover the Secret Technology of the World's Greatest Spy (DVD). Lionsgate. 2015.
Modern Marvels: James Bond Gadgets (DVD). A&E Home Video. 2007.
Gresh, Lois H.; Weinberg, Robert (2006). The Science of James Bond: From Bullets to Bowler Hats to Boat Jumps, the Real Technology Behind 007's Fabulous Films. Wiley. ISBN 978-0471661955.
Millard, Andre (2018). Equipping James Bond: Guns, Gadgets, and Technological Enthusiasm. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 9781421426655.


== References ==


== External links ==
James Bond Watches
James Bond Gadget Watch History
Review of the "Bond" Omega Seamaster Professional
BondMovies.com: Q Branch (archive)
James Bond MM: James Bond gadgets