Punu people

The Punu  or Bapunu (Bayag) (Bapounou, Gìpunu), are a Bantu ethnic group of Central Africa, and of the Great Lakes Region. They are one of the four major people of Gabon, inhabiting interior mountain and grassland areas.  They are around the upper N'Gounié and Nyanga Rivers in Gabon. They are also located in Bandundu, Kasai in Democratic Republic of Congo. Bapunu also live in the Kibangou, Divenie and Mossendjo districts of the Republic of the Congo, in the Nkwango River area between Zambia and Angola.
They are linguistically related to the Bajagas of Lunda kingdom and to Gikuyu of the Kenya grassland area. In the 1600s the Punu Bajag people of Lunda Kingdom were attacked by Chokwe tribesmen, resulting a new migration of Punu Bajag to the northwest towards Republic of Congo through the cabinda enclave via Angola and via the Democratic Republic of Congo to kibangou district in Republic of Congo then Gabon where they settled definitely up to today. In the 17th century, they gathered rubber, Punu Bajag people were known by Portuguese colonialists as Punu Bajag warriors because they were attacking the Kongo Empire people, destroying everything in their way and causing damages and loss to both King Alfonso I and Portuguese who were doing business together at that time, they participated in Slave Trade, sending both Kongo Empire people and acquisitions from further inland to Loango and Fernan Vaz.
In the present day, the Punu-bajag are noted for their cloth made of palm fiber and iron weaponry.


== ِِArt ==
One of the well known Punu art objects are the white masks, now known as the Punu masks.The masks are life size, they can cover a persons face. They are worn by the dancers in south Gabon. When there is a major community event the dancers wear these masks, one major event would be a dance preformed for a secret society. Europeans have been trying to discover the Punu society for a long time, but not until June 1865 did the first European discover the first white mask. Later in 1925-30 Europeans had more access to the societies and the secrecy was less than before.


== External links ==
Page on the Bapounou


== References ==