Blackgate Penitentiary

This page list the locations in the DC Universe, the shared universe setting of DC Comics.


== Sites ==
The Arrowcave, former base of operations of Green Arrow and Speedy.
Avernus Cemetery, a burial ground located in Central City for enemies of the Flash known as the Rogues; it is in a hidden location.
The Batcave, headquarters of Batman. Located directly beneath Wayne Manor.
Burnside is a borough of Gotham City that is connected to Gotham by the Burnside Bridge. Burnside Heights is the trendy neighborhood in Burnside where "New 52" Batgirl (Barbara Gordon) lives.
The Casanova Club was a nightclub owned by Alex Logue in Newcastle, England. It was there that a demon was summoned and John Constantine failed to save a young girl who was taken to Hell.
Crime Alley, the most dangerous area of Gotham, where Thomas and Martha Wayne were killed by Joe Chill during a mugging.
The Daily Planet Building, home office of the Daily Planet, Metropolis' main newspaper.
Danny the Street, a sentient street and member of the Doom Patrol
The Flash Museum, a memorial to the Flash (Barry Allen).  Located in Central City.
The Fortress of Solitude, an Arctic fortress used by Superman as a secret lair.  Located near the North Pole.
The Hall of Doom, base of the Legion of Doom.
The Hall of Justice, one-time home base of the Justice League.  A version of this is the headquarters of the Justice League in the animated series Super Friends.  Another version of this appears in the new series Young Justice, where the Hall appears as the headquarters of the Justice League to the public eye.
The House of Mystery, extradimensional structure presided over by Cain.
The House of Secrets, extradimensional structure presided over by Abel. A version of this is also the headquarters of the Secret Six.
Reichuss Mansion, a mobile haunted house that served as the House of Secrets in the 1990s Vertigo series of that name.
The Iceberg Lounge, nightclub and base of operations for the Penguin.  Located in Gotham City.
Justice Society Headquarters. Current version built on the foundation of the former brownstone headquarters and museum. The former headquarters located in Gotham City, the latter in Manhattan. Sometimes called Dodds Mansion.
LexCorp Towers complex, former headquarters of Lex Luthor. Located in Metropolis.
Lux, the bar/nightclub based in Los Angeles owned by Lucifer Morningstar and his mistress, Mazikeen.
The Netherworld, a fictional area of the city of Chicago.
The Oblivion Bar, an extradimensional bar used as a gathering place/hangout for magic users, as well as the headquarters for the Shadowpact.
Project Cadmus, an experimental genetics lab. Located in Metropolis.  The Young Justice animated series has it located in Washington D.C.
The Sanctum of Doctor Fate, located in Salem, Massachusetts.
The Secret Sanctuary, original headquarters of the Justice League of America and briefly headquarters of the Doom Patrol. Located in Happy Harbor, Rhode Island.
Sherwood Florist, originally in Seattle and now in Star City, the business operated by Dinah Laurel Lance, the Black Canary.
Suicide Slum, a dangerous part of Metropolis.
Titans Tower, headquarters of the Teen Titans, originally located in New York City.  Currently located in San Francisco.
The Underworld, a place in Metropolis's sewers which is rejected by society and where the Warworlders took control.
Valhalla Cemetery, a burial ground located in Metropolis for superheroes who have died in the line of duty; it is meant to be a sacred resting place for superheroes.
Wayne Manor, ancestral home of Bruce Wayne. Located outside Gotham City.
Wayne Tower, the location of the main offices of Wayne Enterprises. It is located in downtown Gotham City.


=== Correctional facilities ===
Arkham Asylum, an asylum used to house Batman's criminally-insane enemies. Known inmates are Alberto Falcone, Black Mask, Blockbuster, Calendar Man, Clayface, Crazy Quilt, Deadshot, Doctor Phosphorus, Electrocutioner, Great White Shark, Harley Quinn, Hugo Strange, Humpty Dumpty, Jeremiah Arkham, Joker, Killer Croc, Killer Moth, Lock-Up, Mad Hatter, Magpie, Maxie Zeus, Mr. Freeze, Poison Ivy, Professor Milo, Professor Pyg, Prometheus, Puzzleman, Psycho-Pirate, Ra's al Ghul, Riddler, Scarecrow, Signalman, Tally Man, Ten-Eyed Man, Two-Face, Vanity, Victor Zsasz, Ventriloquist.
Belle Reve, a high security metahuman prison located in Louisiana. Headquarters of the Suicide Squad. Known inmates are Black Manta, Captain Boomerang, the Color Queens prison gang (Crazy Quilt, Doctor Light, Doctor Spectro, Multi-Man, Rainbow Raider), Deadshot, El Diablo, Hector Hammond, Harley Quinn, Icicle, Joker, Killer Croc, Lex Luthor, Mr. Freeze, Ocean Master, Penguin, Punch and Jewelee, Riddler, Prankster, and Shadow-Thief.
Blackgate Penitentiary. Located near Gotham City, a prison known to house mostly non-metahuman criminals for Gotham. Known inmates are Actuary, Baffler, Bane, Black Spider, Bonaventure Strake, The Boss, Calendar Man, Catman, Catwoman, Charles "Rhino" Daley, Clayface, Cluemaster, Cypher, Dalton Perry, David Cain, Dean "Hungry" Fahey, Doctor Fang, Doctor Phosphorus, Dragoncat, Electrocutioner, Emperor Blackgate (formerly Emperor Penguin), Ernie Chubb, Eustace Marker, Faceless, Firebug, Firefly, Gunhawk, Henry Etchison, Hsui Cheung, Jan Brodie, Jared Manx, John McCone, Joker, KGBeast, Lady Spellbinder, Monsoon, Mortimer Kadaver, Mugsy, Penguin, Polka-Dot Man, Professor Pyg, Puzzleman, Ratcatcher, Rupert Thorne, Sasha Bordeaux, Stanislaus Johns, Steeljacket, Tony Zucco, the Trigger Twins, Ventriloquist, Victor Zsasz Vincent "The Shark" Starkey, Weasel, William Guilloryta, Wrath, and Zeke.
Gotham State Penitentiary, a prison located in the Sommerset neighborhood twelve miles from Arkham Asylum. Known inmates are Big Mike Russo, Catman, Cavalier, Deadshot, Joker, Mirror Man, Mole, Ned Creegan, Nicholas Lucien, Penguin, Charles "Rhino" Daley, Spook, Ten-Eyed Man, Two-Face, and Ventriloquist.
Iron Heights Penitentiary, a high security prison devised for many of the foes of either version of Flash. Located near Keystone City. Known inmates are Blacksmith, Captain Boomerang, Captain Cold, Cicada, Clay Parker, Doctor Alchemy, Double Down, Eobard Thawne, Fallout, Girder, Godspeed, Gorilla Grodd, Murmur, Peek-a-Boo, Pied Piper, Top, Trickster, Weather Wizard
Peña Duro, also called "Hard Rock" in English, former prison of the villain Bane, located in Santa Prisca.
The Ravenscar Secure Facility, a mental asylum in Yorkshire that John Constantine was committed to after the Newcastle Incident.
Slabside Island, a.k.a. the Slab and Slabsire Penitentiary, a high security metahuman prison. Originally located in New Jersey, it was later transported to Antarctica after what happened in Joker's "Last Laugh" riot. Shilo Norman was the original warden of Slabside Penitentiary. Known inmates are Apeface, Axis, Barrage, Black Mass, Bolt, Captain Nazi, Carnivora, Cerberus, Chemo, Chiller, Construct, Copperhead, Deadline, Deadshot, Dervish, Doctor Phosphorus, Doctor Polaris, Doctor Sivana, a Dominator, Effigy, Fatality, Floronic Man, Frag, Hector Hammond, Hellgrammite, Icicle, Joker, Kilg%re, Killer Frost, Killer Wasp, King Shark, Lady Spellbinder, Leather, Mad Dog McCoy, Mammoth, the Masters of Disaster, Matter Master, Merlyn, Metalhead, Metallo, Mongul, Multi-Man, Ocean Master, Orca, Phobia, Plasmus, Psimon, Psycho-Pirate, Rancor, Riot, Shark, Shrapnel, Silver Ghost, Slig, Solomon Grundy, Sonar, Splatter, Terra-Man, Warjack, Warp, White Dragon
Stryker's Island, a penitentiary located in Metropolis. Known inmates are Barrage, Bloodsport, Kryptonite Man, Lex Luthor, Morgan Edge, Parasite, Prankster, Taddeus Killgrave, Toyman, and Ulysses.


=== Industrial sites ===
AmerTek Industries - A military arms dealer previously located in Washington DC. John Henry Irons worked there until he discovered his inventions were being used for evil purposes.
Big Belly Burger - Popular fast food restaurant chain.
Daggett Industries - A pharmaceutical company founded and owned by Roland Daggett.
Ferris Aircraft - Aerospace company founded and owned by Carl Ferris and run by his daughter Carol Ferris.
GothCorp - Company based in Gotham City, founded and owned by Ferris Boyle.
Ironworks - Located in Metropolis, founded and owned by John Henry Irons.
Kord Industries - Industrial firm founded and owned by Ted Kord, the Blue Beetle.
LexCorp - International multi corporation founded and owned by Lex Luthor.
Lord Technologies - was founded and owned by Maxwell Lord.
Rathaway Industries - was founded by Osgood Rathaway, father of the Pied Piper.
Queen Industries - Is an international corporation founded and owned by Robert and Moira Queen and later by Oliver Queen.
Stagg Enterprises - A research and development firm in genetices research founded by Simon Stagg.
S.T.A.R. Labs - Labs for scientific research on metahuman studies located in various facilities.
Wayne Enterprises - an international multi corporation owned by Bruce Wayne.


=== Extraterrestrial sites ===
Hardcore Station, lawless space-city run by corporations.
The Justice League Satellite, headquarters of the Justice League of America. It is located in orbit 22,300 miles above the surface of the Earth.  It is destroyed during the Crisis on Infinite Earths.
The Justice League Watchtower, originally a White Martian base located on the Moon, it is later used as the headquarters of the JLA.
Portworld, an intergalactic spaceport and home of Green Lanterns Wyxla and Tahr.
Starlag, a prison station used by the Alien Alliance.   First appeared in Invasion! #1 (January 1989).
Ranx the Sentient City, a sentient city and member of the Sinestro Corps.  It was first mentioned in the story "Tygers", in Tales of the Green Lantern Corps Annual #2 (1986).  It is destroyed by Green Lantern Sodam Yat.
Warworld, artificial planet used by Mongul and Brainiac.


=== Schools and universities ===
Burnside College is the private college that Batgirl (Barbara Gordon) attends in the New 52 universe.
Gotham Academy, as of DC Rebirth continuity, is a prestigious private boarding school that many of Gotham City's elite have attended. Previous incarnations of institutes with the name "Gotham Academy" includes The Batman and Young Justice television series, where it was the school of Dick Grayson, Artemis Crock, Barbara Gordon and others.
Gotham University, also called Gotham State University, is located in Gotham City.  In the Golden Age story "The Man Behind the Red Hood!" Batman and Robin, while teaching a criminology class, discover that the Joker is the criminal formerly known as the Red Hood.  Other staff and students include Dr. Jonathan Crane and Stephanie Brown.
Holliday College is the main university in Gateway City. Wonder Woman met Beeta Lambda sorority members the Holliday Girls and Etta Candy there.
Hudson University, located in New Carthage, New York. Notable former students and staff include Dick Grayson, Professor Martin Stein and Duela Dent.
Ivy University, located in Ivy Town. The Atom (Ray Palmer) used to work in the physics department.
Legion Academy, training school for the Legion of Super Heroes.  Located in Metropolis in the 31st century.
Metropolis University, the main university in Metropolis.  Clark Kent is an alumnus of MU.
Midwestern University, located in Keystone City, is the alma mater of Jay Garrick.  In some stories the school is called Western State University.
Stanhope College, located just outside Metropolis. Linda Lee, the Silver Age Supergirl, is a former student.  Post-Crisis, the school, now located in Leesburg, Virginia, is renamed Stanhope University; Linda Danvers is enrolled here.
Université Notre Dame des Ombres (Our Lady of the Shadows University) is a college in France specifically for the training of spies and superenhanced humans.  The headmistress is former Phantom Lady Sandra Knight.  Graduates include future Phantom Lady Dee Tyler, and Vivian and Constance D'Aramis.


=== Sites that exist exclusively in other DC media ===
Stonegate Prison, analogous to Blackgate Prison in Batman: The Animated Series and the greater DC Animated Universe.


== Cities of the DCU Earth ==


=== Fictional cities ===
Amnesty Bay, surface-home of Aquaman and his father, Thomas Curry.  Located in Maine.
Baralsville, a small mining town that is visited by Clark Kent. Located in northern Pennsylvania.
Blüdhaven, former home of Dick Grayson (Nightwing) of the Post-Crisis continuity that was destroyed by the Society. In the New 52 universe, during the DC Rebirth event, the Dick Grayson of that continuity later settled in his reality's version after the pre-Flashpoint Superman told him the story about his alternate universe counterpart. Located near Gotham City in southern New Jersey. Mentioned various times in the Lego Batman Movie as the southerly twin city of Gotham City.
Blue Valley, birthplace of the third Flash (Wally West) and home of Stargirl. Located in Nebraska.
Calvin City, home of the Golden Age Atom. Located in Pennsylvania.
Central City, former home of the second Flash (Barry Allen).  Its location has been variously stated to be in Ohio, Illinois, and Florida.  During the Wally West era, it was shown to be in Missouri, across a river from Keystone City.
Charlton’s Point, home of Miguel Devante, the new Son of Vulcan.
Civic City, former home of the Justice Society of America.  Located in Pennsylvania.
Coast City, home of Green Lantern Hal Jordan.  The city is destroyed by Mongul and the Cyborg Superman during the "Reign of the Supermen!" storyline.  It is later restored by the actions of the Spectre and Hal Jordan. Located in California.
Codsville, small fishing village in Maine for which the original Doom Patrol gave their lives.  Renamed "Four Heroes City" after the death of the Doom Patrol.
Cosmos, hometown of the Teen Titan Risk.  Located in Colorado.
Crucible, a city briefly visited by Resurrection Man. Located in Georgia, on Interstate 285.
Dakota City, home of Icon, Static, Shadow Cabinet and the Blood Syndicate.
Delta City, home of the Heckler and Vext.  It is established in Vext #1 that it exists within regular DCU continuity.
Dos Rios, home of the second El Diablo.  Located in Texas.
Elmond, home of Hawk and Dove. Located in Oregon.
Empire City, home of the second Manhunter (Paul Kirk).  Located somewhere in the East Coast of the United States.
Evergreen City, former home of Green Lantern Hal Jordan. Located in Washington.
Fairfield, former home of Billy Batson (Captain Marvel), Mary Batson (Mary Marvel), and their adopted parents. Destroyed by Mr. Atom.
Fawcett City, home of Captain Marvel, the Marvel Family, Bulletman, Ibis the Invincible, and several other characters formerly associated with Fawcett Comics.  Located in Minnesota.
Feithera, a hidden city of bird-people. Home of Northwind. Located in Greenland (destroyed).
Gateway City, former home of Wonder Woman, the first Mister Terrific and the Spectre. Located in California.
Gorilla City, populated by super-intelligent apes. Home of Solovar and Gorilla Grodd. Located in Africa.
Gotham City, home of the Batman. Former home of Alan Scott. Located in New Jersey across the Delaware Bay.
Happy Harbor, location of the Secret Sanctuary of the JLA, and former home of Lucas "Snapper" Carr. Located in Rhode Island.
Hatton Corners, a small town saved by the Teen Titans in their first appearance.
The Hidden City, home of the magically gifted Homo Magi people, including Zatara and Zatanna. Located in Turkey.
Hope Springs, a small mining town which was once part of the Mosaic World. Visited by Hal Jordan and Green Arrow when it was called Desolation. Located in West Virginia.
Hub City, home of Vic Sage, the first Question and the first Blue Beetle.
Ivy Town, home of the second and current Atom. Located in Massachusetts.
Keystone City, home of both the original and current Flashes: Jay Garrick and Wally West, as well as Jakeem Thunder.  In Post-Crisis stories it is located across a river from Central City.  Located in Kansas.
Liberty Hill, hometown of the third Tattooed Man. Located in the Washington metropolitan area.
Littleville, home of Robby Reed. Located in Colorado.
Manchester, Alabama, adopted hometown of Kid Flash.
Mapleville, a small town Superman visited in Action Comics #179.
Metropolis, home of Superman. Metropolis is speculated to be located in the city of Cleveland, Ohio or in a region of New York/New Jersey, although the vast majority of sources within DC have placed Metropolis in Delaware, on the opposite side of the Delaware Bay from Gotham City in New Jersey (in the "Bronze Age" continuity, these two cities were considered "twin cities" and were connected by the "Metro-Narrows Bridge", stated to be the longest suspension bridge on Earth-One).
Middleton, former home of Martian Manhunter.  Located in Colorado, just north of Denver.
Midway City, former home of Hawkman and Hawkwoman, and the Doom Patrol.  Located in Michigan, previously in Illinois.
Midwest City, former home of Captain Comet (Pre-Crisis only).
Midvale, home of the Pre-Crisis Supergirl.
Monument Point, home to the Justice Society of America as they try to rebuild the city after they failed to save it from destruction.
Nanda Parbat, mystical city hidden in the mountains of Tibet. Home to the League of Assassins.
National City, home of Supergirl. Originally created for her TV series of the same name, but was later adapted into the comics, and then used as Supergirl's home starting from DC Rebirth. Located in Southern California. Coincidentally, there is a real-life National City, California.
New Carthage, location of Hudson University, where Dick Grayson (among others) attended college.  Located in New York.
New Venice, a partially submerged city used as Aquaman's base of operations for a time. Located in Florida.
Opal City, home of Starman.
Park City, former home of Black Canary on Earth-Two.
Platinum Flats, home of the Birds of Prey beginning in 2008. Located in California.
Port Oswego, home of Naomi, located in Oregon.
Portsmouth, home of the second Doctor Mid-Nite. Located in Washington.
Radiance, home of the 1940s hero Little Boy Blue. Located in Pennsylvania.
River City, home of the Odd Man.
Santa Marta, which served the Flash briefly as a base of operations. It was all but destroyed by Major Disaster.  Located in California.
Science City, home of the Titan Red Star.  Located in Russia.
Smallville, former home of Clark Kent and Conner Kent.  Located in Kansas.
Solar City, Florida, home of Bruce Gordon/Eclipso.
Star City, home of Green Arrow.  Location has varied over the years, however the DC Rebirth Green Arrow series specifically states it was originally Seattle, only later being renamed Star City.
Sub Diego, is a submerged part of San Diego located off the coast of California. It is home to Aquagirl and served as a base of operations for Aquaman for a time.
Superbia, the home base of the Ultramarine Corps.  Floated over the radioactive remains of Montevideo, later floated and smashed into Kinshasa.
Tinasha, located in the Democratic Republic of Congo, it is the base of operations for David Zavimbe, the first Batwing.
Vanity, home of Aztek.  Located in Oregon.
Viceroy, home of Resurrection Man.  Located in South Carolina.
Violet Valley, home of the Rachel Pollack version of the Doom Patrol.
Zenith City, a city located near Robby Reed's home in Littleville.


=== Actual cities that also exist on the DCU Earth ===
Baltimore, home of Guy Gardner.
Boston, Massachusetts, former home base of Wonder Woman, and occasional residence of Aquaman and his wife Mera.
Chicago, former home base of Supergirl, Hawkman and Hawkwoman, the second Blue Beetle, and Nightwing.
Dallas, Texas, home to the third Air Wave.
Dayton, home of Black Alice.
Denver, former homebase of The Martian Manhunter.
Detroit, hometown of Cyborg,  John Stewart, Simon Baz, Lady Shiva, and former home base of a Justice League branch and Firestorm and Vixen.
El Paso, hometown of Jaime Reyes, the current Blue Beetle.
Houma, Louisiana, home of Swamp Thing.
Kansas City, Missouri, home to the Doom Patrol during the Kupperberg/ Morrison run.
Los Angeles, hometown of Kyle Rayner; former home base of the hero Manhunter (Kate Spencer), The Outsiders and Blue Devil.
Metropolis, Illinois, celebrates Superman the fictional character, exists in the DCU as celebrating the real Superman.
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, hometown of Todd Rice, Obsidian.
New York, home base to many heroes over the years, including the current incarnation of the Teen Titans. Nicknamed the Cinderella City in the DC Universe.
Philadelphia, home of the Ray and the Black Condor.
Phoenix, home to Starman Will Payton.
Pittsburgh, home for several years to the original Firestorm.
San Diego, half of this city was submerged under the ocean due to an earthquake, becoming Sub Diego. The outlying suburbs are home to Animal Man.
San Francisco, former home base of the Teen Titans, Supergirl, the Secret Society of Supervillains, The Power Company, and Zatanna.
Seattle, current home base of Green Arrow and his company, Q-Core. Former home city of Black Canary, where she owned and operated Sherwood Florist.
St. Louis is the hometown of Skyrocket.
St. Roch, the New Orleans neighborhood where the Modern Age Hawkman and Hawkgirl live.
Topeka, Kansas, destroyed via explosion in an alien invasion.
Tokyo, Japan, home base for the Super Young Team and Big Science Action.
Washington DC, current home base of Steel, Alpha Centurion and the Freedom Fighters.
Waverly, Pennsylvania, home base of the Hellenders.
London, England, United Kingdom, current home base of Wonder Woman and occasional residence of John Constantine.


=== Cities that exist exclusively in other DC media ===
Londinium, a fictionalized version of London, England. (Batman (TV series) - Season 3, Episodes 105-107).
Dairyland, the lushest, greenest farmland in America. Located in the Heartland. (Super Friends - Season 1, Episode 7)
Shusterville, a small college town where Clark Kent and T.J. White attend the Siegel School of Journalism at Shuster University. Located in Florida. (Superboy (TV series))
Capitol City, a major city near Shusterville, and the location of the office of the Bureau for Extra-Normal Matters where Clark Kent and Lana Lang are interns. Located in Florida. (Superboy (TV series))
Edge City, metropolitan area mentioned in various episodes of Smallville, including "Stray", "Ryan", "Power", "Doomsday", "Escape",  "Prodigal", and "Sneeze".
Granville, a small Kansas town mentioned and seen in various episodes of Smallville, including "Skinwalker and "Lexmas".
Jump City, home to the Teen Titans in the series of the same name. Located on the West Coast.
Steel City, home to the Titans East in the Teen Titans series.  Located on the East Coast.
Seaboard City, an illusory metropolis on the American East Coast in an alternate Earth in an alternate dimension. Everyday life resembled a late Golden Age to early Silver Age "four-color" superhero comic in which the heroes (the Justice Guild of America) constantly fight the villains (the Injustice Guild of America). Green Lantern remembers reading the old comics it was based on as a child. The events on the alternate Earth (similar to DC's Earth-2) apparently sent out inter-dimensional psychic vibrations. The vibrations then "inspired" the psychically-sensitive artists and writers to create the JGA comic in the Justice League's own dimension (presumed to be DC's Earth-1). (Justice League (animated series) - Season 1, Episodes 16-17)
Tempest Key, home of Arthur "A.C." Curry in the unaired The CW pilot Aquaman.  Located near the Bermuda Triangle, presumably in Florida.
Freeland, home to Black Lightning in the series of the same name. Located in Georgia.


== Fictional geographic locations and countries of the DCU ==
Abyssia, underground nation once infested by vampires, saved by the Outsiders.
Atlantis, the legendary sunken continent. Ruled by Aquaman.
Poseidonis, a major Atlantean city.
Tritonis, Atlantean city populated by mer-people.  Home of Lori Lemaris.
Thierna Na Oge, the city of the Tuatha De Danann, a culture that has a great affinity for magic.
Badhnisia, small South Seas island nation, in or near present-day Indonesia, where Johnny Thunder was raised.
Bana-Mighdall is a fictional Amazon nation located in the Middle East.  Birthplace of Artemis.
Bialya, former Mid-Eastern refuge of super-villains. Its population was nearly wiped out by Black Adam during 52.
Bhutran, fictional isolated land in southern Asia surrounded by mountains.  First appeared in Superman Vol. 2 #97 (February 1995).
Blackhawk Island, former homebase of the Blackhawks.
Bulgravia, a fictional Balkan country.  Setting for the first mission of the Human Defense Corps.
Corto Maltese, a war-torn island featured in The Dark Knight Returns, Batman, Smallville, and Arrow.
Dinosaur Island, an uncharted Pacific isle inhabited by dinosaurs.  The setting for "The War That Time Forgot" stories.
Galonia, one of several minor European nations controlled by the Earth-Two Lex Luthor.
Gotham Bay, a river which runs through Gotham City.  Speculated to be the Delaware Bay region in geography.
Hasaragua, a fictional South American country. Home of Brutale.
Kahndaq, a fictional Middle Eastern country, home of and formerly ruled by Black Adam.
Kasnia, a fictional Balkan country. (DC animated universe)
Kor, the fictional African kingdom of Doctor Mist.
Markovia, home of Terra and Geo-Force. Referred to in Arrow.
Molinia, a fictional Latin American country.  First appears in "A Job for Superhombre," Superman #53, August 1948.
Modora, home of Sonar.
Pokolistan, nation which now occupies the site of former Modora. Once ruled by General Zod.
Nyasir, a fictional Eastern-African country; has strong 'Redemption' religious movement. Capital city, Buranda.
Oolong Island, a fictional location in DC Universe and home to Chang Tzu.
Quirian Emirates, a fictional country briefly mentioned in the Batman: The Animated Series episode "The Cape and Cowl Conspiracy" (DC animated universe).
Qurac, a fictional Middle Eastern country.  It is located on the west side of the Persian Gulf, on the Arabian Peninsula.
Rhapastan, a fictional Middle Eastern country said to border Turkey.  Plastic Man and Aquaman attempt to broker a ceasefire there during the "Tower of Babel" storyline.
Rheelasia, a fictional Asian country.  First appeared in Birds of Prey #1 (January, 1999).
San Monté, a fictional Latin American country.  First appeared in "War in San Monté," Action Comics #2, July 1938.
San Sebor, overthrown by the corporate sponsored Conglomerate.
Santa Prisca, Caribbean island homeland of Bane.
Superbia, a mobile city-state which initially floated above the radioactive ruins of Montevideo, Uruguay.
Starfish Island - The island where billionaire Oliver Queen was stranded before becoming Green Arrow.
Syraq is a fictional Middle Eastern country.
Themyscira, also known as Paradise Island, is the home of Wonder Woman and the Amazons.
Toran, one of several minor European nations controlled by the Earth-Two Lex Luthor.
Tropidor, a fictional Central American country.
Tundi, a fictional West African country. After the defeat of their ruler Lord Battle at the hands of David Zavimbe, the U.N. seized control to stir it toward democracy. 
Umec is a fictional Middle Eastern country.  Its name is an acronym created by Greg Rucka, and is short for "unnamed Middle Eastern country".
Vlatava, homeland of Count Vertigo, destroyed by The Spectre.
Zandia, homeland of Brother Blood


=== Fictional geographic locations and countries that exist exclusively in other DC media ===
Nairomi, a fictional African country that appears in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice.


== Planetary systems ==
-7Pi, homeworld in Green Lantern Sector.
1417.196.E, a planet destroyed by Star 196.
Almerac, former homeworld of Maxima, Ultraa, and Mongal; speculated to be near the Pisces constellation and Andromeda in Capricorn.
Angor, homeworld of the Champions of Angor, or the Justifiers (destroyed).
Apiaton, homeworld of the Insectoids. Insectoids usually imply near Scorpius.
Apokolips, homeworld of Darkseid.
Appelax, homeworld of the Appelaxians, the original foes of the Justice League.
Aoran, homeworld of Evil Star with the entire population killed.
Archos, a primitive planet.
Arden, an agricultural community of Green Lantern Monak.
Astonia, the dying homeworld of Blue Lantern Saint Walker.
Avalon, homeworld of DC Comics' King Arthur.
Bellatrix, homeworld of Green Lantern Boodikka.
Beltair IV, home of the Aquoids.
Bizarro World, homeworld of Bizarro, also called Htrae (Pre-Crisis only).
Biot, a Manhunter manufacturing facility and planet.
Bolovax Vik, former homeworld of Kilowog now called Bolovax Vik II; near the Great Bear constellation.
Bryak, a planet ruled by Brainiac.
Calaton, a homeworld monarchy ravaged 250,000 years ago by Doomsday.
Cairn, a planet formerly controlled by a family of intergalactic drug dealers.  Later freed by and made the headquarters of L.E.G.I.O.N..
The Chthalonia System
Colu, a planet of sentient computers. Homeworld of Brainiac, Vril Dox and Licensed Extra Governmental Interstellar Operatives Network and Brainiac 5
Criq, homeworld of Green Lantern Driq.
Czarnia, homeworld of Lobo (destroyed).  Possibly located near the Great Bear constellation.
The Daffath System, star system of Sinestro Corps member Bedovian.
Daxam, homeworld of the Daxamites; hypothetically located in Sagittarius. Home of Mon-El.
Debstam IV, a planet conquered by Mongul.
Dhor, homeworld of Kanjar Ro.
Exxor, homeworld of the Wonder Twins.
F'py, homeworld of Green Lantern Gk'd, of Sector 1337.
G'newt, a planet of humanoid dogs. Homeworld of Green Lantern G'nort.
Gallo, a tiny satellite at the edge of the galaxy near Oa. Homeworld of the mysterious Tribune.
Gaolus, a maximum security prison planet.
Galtea, homeworld of Sarkus the Infinite.
Garon, homeworld of the Headmen.
Glazzon, homeworld of Green Lantern Ahtier.
Graxos IV, homeworld of Green Lantern Arisia in the Gemini constellation.
Graxos V, a planet with a harsh judicial system.  Homeworld of Green Lantern Blish Rrab.
Grenda, a planet of sentient robots.  Homeworld of Green Lanterns Stel and Yron.
H'lven, homeworld of Ch'p and B'dg of the Green Lantern Corps.
Harmony, homeworld of the now-deceased Goldstar.
Hwagaagaa, a planet seized by Tebans.
Ith'kaa, base of operations for Captain Comet, and location of Comet City.
Inner Tasnia - homeworld of Green Lantern Flodo Span.
Planet J586, a planet of intelligent plants. Homeworld of Green Lantern Medphyll.
Karna, homeworld of the Gordanians.
Kalanor, a planet possibly located in the Taurus constellation]]. Homeworld of Despero.
Korugar, homeworld of Sinestro, Katma Tui, and Soranik Natu of the Green Lantern Corps.
Khondra, location of the secret military laboratory that created sentient virus and Sinestro Corp member Despotellis.
Khundia, homeworld of the Khunds; speculated to be near the Great Bear constellation.
Kreno, a planet where cyborgs are engineered.  Homeworld of cyborg mercenary B'aad.
Krolotea, homeworld of the Krolotean Gremlins.
Krypton, homeworld of Superman and Supergirl (destroyed).  Formerly located near Pisces in the Andromeda Galaxy, speculated to be pointed north towards Libra in some modern versions.  Krypton orbited the red giant Rao within the Pleiades in post-Modern Age comics.  Locations on Krypton include:
Argo City, home of Supergirl.  It was blasted into space when Krypton was destroyed, but managed to survive due to an atmospheric dome installed over the city.
Kandor, Kryptonian city shrunk by Brainiac.  Now residing inside a bottle in Superman's Fortress of Solitude.
Kryptonopolis, capital city of the planet Krypton, birthplace of Superman.
Vathlo Island, a continent on the planet Krypton.  Its inhabitants were primarily black-skinned.  In the Earth-23 universe, it is the birthplace of Calvin Ellis, a.k.a. Superman.
M'brai, a planet with a unique evolutionary system.
Maag, homeworld of  Green Lantern Volk of Maag.
Maltus, original homeworld of the Guardians of the Universe, Zamarons and Controllers; hypothetically located near the Pleiades.
Mogo, a sentient planet who is also a member of the Green Lantern Corps.
Muscaria, a planet of sentient fungi. Homeworld of Green Lantern Amanita.
Myrg, a planet ruled by Princess Ramia and her Terran consort/husband Doiby Dickles.
New Genesis, homeworld of the New Gods; fictionally located within Orion and Andromeda.
Oa, homeworld of the Guardians of the Universe, speculated to be near the center of the Milky Way Galaxy.
Mosaic World, a chaotic place on Oa where Appa Ali Apsa transported various cities from different galaxies.
Odym, a Paradise-like planet, location of the Blue Lantern Corps Power Battery.
The Obsidian Deeps, a Green Lantern Sector in deep space.
Orinda, a secret base of operations for the Manhunters.
Qualar IV, a planet of humanoid chicken-like aliens. Homeworld of Green Lantern Perdoo.
Ovacron Six - homeworld of Green Lantern Hannu.  Its inhabitants disdain the use of any weapons and rely on their own brute strength.
Pandina - homeworld of Star Sapphire Remoni-Notra.
The Puppet Planetoid – a planet in the DC Universe in the 30th century. According to legend, a race of giants created playthings on this world long ago. It is now mostly uninhabited. A number of notable events took place here for the Legion of Super-Heroes. When under attack from Satan Girl, Supergirl hid the Legion here. Ultra Boy once saved Sun Boy's life here, though this occurred in a backstory. Former Legionnaire, Blok eventually found his way to this world and lived in seclusion for many years, until tracked down by the space pirate Roxxas, who used advanced Dominator weapons to kill him as a kind of "demonstration" for the Dominators of his abilities.
Rann, adopted homeworld of Adam Strange located in the Polara star system.
Ramnos, homeworld devastated by the Traitor.
The Rexulus System - star system of Setag Retss.
Rimbor, homeworld of Ultra Boy and Timberwolf.
Rojira, homeworld of the Ruulan Green Lanterns.
Ryut, a dead planet and location of the Black Lantern Corps Power Battery.
Scylla, space of the Triarch.
Slyggia, homeworld of Green Lantern Salaak.
The Solar System
Venus, former homeworld of Mister Mind.
Earth
The Moon, location of the Justice League Watchtower and former homeworld of Eclipso.
Mars, former homeworld of the Martian Manhunter and the White Martians.
Saturn, orbited by the lunar homeworlds of the Faceless Hunter, Jemm, and the White and Red Saturnian races.
Kalamar, subatomic lunar world.
The Sun, native white-yellow star and source of Kryptonian superpowers on Earth.
Southern Goldstar, homeworld of Green Lantern Olapet.
Sputa, bacterial homeworld of the Green Lantern Larvox.
Takron-Galtos, a prison planet seen in the Justice League of America and Legion of Super-Heroes comics.
Talok III, homeworld of former Starman Mikaal Tomas.
Talok IV, homeworld of Sinestro Corps member Lyssa Drak
Talok VIII, homeworld of Legion of Super-Heroes member Shadow Lass.
Tanjent, homeworld to psionic children.
Tchk-Tchk, homeworld of the Tchkii Legion.
Thanotopsia, homeworld destroyed by Lobo using nuclear weapons
Thanagar, former homeworld of the Thanagarian race, Hawkman (Katar Hol) and Hawkwoman located in the Polara star system; destroyed during the Infinite Crisis.
Thar: a living star once worshipped by aliens.
Zintha, an icy planet that orbits Thar.
Thordia, a planet located near Cetus. Homeworld to Darkstar's enemy Pay-Back.
Thoron, a planet in the same solar system as Krypton.  Its inhabitants gain superpowers under a yellow sun, but are not as strong as Kryptonians.  Homeworld of Halk Kar.
Throneworld, capital of a galactic empire. Ruled by former Starman Prince Gavyn.
Thronn, homeworld of the Thronnians and the Honor Team of Thronn.
Transilvane, an artificial planet created by NASA to simulate extraterrestrial environments.  Notable for having two large horn-like protuberances.
Trigus VIII, homeworld of the Femazons.
Tristram, homeworld of Green Lantern M'Dahna of Sector 2751.
Trogk, homeworld of Sinestro Corps member Moose of Trogk.
Tront, homeworld of Green Lantern Eddore.
Ungara, homeworld of Green Lantern Abin Sur.
The Vegan star system, a neighboring star system of twenty-five planets which are home to many races, including the Omega Men.
Citadel Homeworld
Karna, homeworld of the Gordanians.
Hnyxx
Okaara, homeworld of the Warlords of Okaara. Location of the Orange Light, where Larfleeze held the power of Avarice.
[Ogyptu, homeworld of an interplanetary giant race.
Tamaran, homeworld of Starfire.
Prison Planet
Slagg
Uxor
Wombworld
Ventura, the "gamblers' planet".  Homeworld  of the villainous Rokk and Sorban.
Vivarium, an artificial planet of the Ayries.
Vulcan, homeworld of Green Lantern Saarek.
Warworld, an artificial planet created by the Warzoons.
Xanshi, a planet of bird-like beings. Green Lantern John Stewart was blamed for its destruction. Homeworld of the villain Fatality.
Xarda
Xudar, homeworld of Green Lantern Tomar Re.
Ydoc, a gladiatorial planet.  Homeworld of Green Lantern Vandor.
Ysmault, the Guardians-sealed home for the Empire of Tears and the location of the Red Lantern Corps Power Battery.
Zakkaria, homeworld of the Crimson Star Mob.
Zamaron homeworld of the Zamarons and the Violet Lantern Corps; speculated to be near Sirius. Feminine intelligent Nordic or reptilian species can range anywhere to Virgo-Libra North and from Cetus, in the vicinity of Aquarius.
Zebron, a planet of plant-like people threatened by the Ravagers from Olys.


=== Planets and moons which exist during the era of the LSH ===
Aarok, a planet colonized by Earth natives in the future. Homeworld of XS.
Aleph, homeworld of Kinetix; formerly populated by a magical civilization.
Angtu, the poisonous homeworld of the villainous Mano, who "single-handedly" destroyed his own planet.
Baaldur, homeworld of Glorith.
Bgztl, homeworld of Phantom Girl, where the natives have the power of intangibility.
Bismoll, homeworld of Tenzil Kem (also known as Matter-Eater Lad). The people of Bismoll have the ability to eat and digest all forms of matter.
Braal, homeworld of Cosmic Boy and his younger brother, Magnetic Kid. Braalians possess the power of magnetism.
Cargg, homeworld of Triplicate Girl/Duo Damsel, where the natives have the ability to split into three individuals.
Colu, homeworld of Brainiac and Brainiac 5.
Daxam, a sister planet of Krypton. Homeworld of Lar Gand (also known as Mon-El or Valor).
Dryad, homeworld of Blok.
Durla, homeworld of Chameleon Boy and his race of shapeshifters.
Hajor, homeworld of the telekinetic mutant Kid Psycho.
Hykraius, homeworld of Tellus.
Imsk, homeworld of Shrinking Violet.  Imskians are able to shrink to tiny, even microscopic, size at will.
Karna, homeworld of the Gordanians
Kathoon, a perpetually dark planet with no sun. Homeworld of Night Girl.
Khundia, homeworld of the aggressive, warlike Khunds.
Labyrinth, a prison planet that served as a successor to Takron-Galtos.
Lallor, homeworld of Duplicate Boy, Evolvo Lad, Gas Girl, Life Lass, and Beast Boy.
Lupra, homeworld of Color Kid.
Lythyl, a harsh and cruel planet of warriors. Homeworld of the second Karate Kid.
Mardru, homeworld of Chlorophyll Kid.
Myar, the "alchemists' planet", and homeworld of Nemesis Kid.
Naltor, homeworld of Dream Girl.  The inhabitants of Naltor possess the power of precognition.
Nullport, a planetoid famed for the construction of spacecraft.
Orando, the medieval homeworld of Princess Projectra (also known as Sensor Girl).
Phlon, homeworld of Chemical King.
Rigel 9, a very populous planet of one-eyed aliens. A possible Simpsons reference, it was mentioned in the second episode of Justice League by Green Lantern John Stewart. It is said to lie in sector 2814.
Rimbor, homeworld of Ultra Boy.
Shanghalla, a planetoid that serves as a burial place for the galaxy's greatest superheroes.
Shwar, homeworld of Fire Lad.
Somahtur, homeworld of Infectious Lass.
Starhaven, a planet colonized by Native Americans. Homeworld of Dawnstar.
Takron-Galtos, an artificial prison world built to contain the galaxy's worst supervillains.
Talok VIII, homeworld of Shadow Lass/Umbra.
Titan, a moon of Saturn and homeworld of Imra Ardeen (also known as Saturn Girl), and Saturn Queen.  All Titanians possess telepathy.
Tharr, homeworld of Polar Boy, a member of a race of humanoids who can generate intense cold at will.
Toomey VI, homeworld of Green Lantern Barreer Wot.
Trom, homeworld of Element Lad, the last survivor of his planet's element-transmuting race.
Vonn, a planet invaded by the Tython.
Vengar, homeworld of the evil Emerald Empress.
Weber's World - an artificial planet that serves as the headquarters of the United Planets.
Winath, a planet where twin births are the norm. Homeworld of the twins Garth Ranzz (also known as Lightning Lad, or Live Wire) and Ayla Ranzz (also known as Lightning Lass or Spark) and their brother Mekt Ranzz (also known as Lightning Lord).
Xanthu, homeworld of Star Boy and Atmos (comics).
Zerox, the "sorcerer's world".  Homeworld of Mordru the Merciless, and the planet where the White Witch learned the practice of magic.
Zoon (or "Zuun"), homeworld of Timberwolf.
Zwen, homeworld of Stone Boy.  The inhabitants of Zwen developed the ability to transform themselves into stone.


== Extradimensional realms ==
The Antimatter Universe of Qward
The Antimatter Earth, homeworld of the Crime Syndicate.
Azarath, home of Raven.
Barter's Shop, mysterious shop owned by Hawk & Dove foe Barter, it is a dimensional nexus.
The Bleed, a void between dimensions of the Multiverse.
Darkworld, birthplace of the Atlantean gods.
The Deadlands, home of demons fought by Fate
Destiny's Garden of Forking Ways, an endless labyrinth of possible histories.
The Dreaming, realm of the sleeping mind. Ruled by Dream of the Endless a.k.a. the Sandman.
The Dream Realm, a realm where telepaths such as the Key reside.
Earth D, home of the Justice Alliance of America, as seen in Legends of the DC Universe: Crisis on Infinite Earths (February 1999)
Emerald Space, dimensional space for the Green Lanterns who died in action, as seen in Hal Jordan and the Green Lantern Corps #9 (DC Rebirth 2016).
Faerie, mystical realm of the legendary Fair Folk. Ruled by Auberon and Titania.
The Fifth Dimension, an interdimesional reality that exists outside the normal space-time continuum.
Zrrrf, the home of Mister Mxyzptlk, Bat-Mite, Qwsp, and Thunderbolt.
The Fourth World
Apokolips, homeworld of Darkseid and his minions.
Armagetto, capital city of Apokolips.
The God Wave, an interstellar phenomenon from the previous universe.
New Genesis, homeworld of the New Gods who are led by Highfather.
The Promethean Galaxy, location of the Source.
The Source Wall, the supposed edge of reality itself.
Gemworld, a mystical realm ruled by gem-based royal houses.
The Ghost Zone, which Prometheus uses to teleport interdimensionally.
Hell, abode of the demons and afterworld of the damned.
Hypertime, the interconnected web of divergent timelines.
Ifé, other dimensional homeland of the African gods known as the Orishas, visited by Spectre when searching for God.
Jejune Realm, a land of comical lesser gods from Vext.
The Land of the Nightshades, a realm of shadow-manipulators. Birthworld of Nightshade.
The Land of the Unliving, home dimension of the cosmic being known as Nekron, Lord of the Unliving.
Limbo, the void between realities. Former prison of the Justice Society.
The Meta-Zone, homeworld of Shade the Changing Man.
The Mirror World, the fourth dimension. Home of the Duomalians and the Orinocas. Originally discovered by Zatara, later rediscovered by Samuel Scudder, the Mirror Master.
Mount Olympus, home of the Greco-Roman gods.
The Multiverse, formerly infinite, now a series of 52 parallel Earths.
Myrra, a realm of sword and sorcery. Former home of Nightmaster.
The Oblivion Bar, an extra-dimensional bar that only magically-talented persons can access. Headquarters of the Shadowpact.
The Omega Realm, an extra-dimensional realm where Darkseid can send a victim who is hit by his Omega Effect.
The Paradise Dimension, a dimension where Superman-Prime gains his powers.
The Pax Dimension, a dimension where the Bloodline Parasites come from.
The Phantom Zone, a prison realm created by the Kryptonians.
The pocket universe created by the Time Trapper.
Purgatory, an afterworld where souls atone for their crimes.
Pytharia, an Earth-like realm resembling prehistoric history.
The Rock of Eternity, home of the wizard Shazam, located at the center of space and time.
Savoth is a planet that is the homeworld of the Savothians, a race of camel-like aliens who hold a longstanding friendship with the Flash family. The planet is located in another dimension from Earth, which can only be accessed by the Speed Force.
The Shadowlands, a place of primordial darkness. It is the power source for Obsidian and the Shade, among others.
The Silver City, abode of the angels and afterworld of the blessed.
The Sixth Dimension, it serves as the "Multiverse Control Room" which is at the top of the Multiverse scale. The Super Celestial Perpetua created her children Monitor, Anti-Monitor, and World Forger here and either one can regenerate here if they are destroyed.
Skartaris, a savage magical dimension "within" the Earth. Current home of Travis Morgan, the Warlord.
The Speed Force, which all speedsters tap into.
The Tantu Totem worn by Vixen contains the extradimensional home of the African god Anansi.
Teall, an alternate dimension home to microscopic energy beings. Quislet of the Legion of Super-Heroes is a Teallian.
The Timestream, a dimension where time is expressed spatially. Home of the Timepoint; also called Vanishing Point, headquarters of the Linear Men.
Time Point, a prison at the end of time.
Wintersgate Manor, a dimensional nexus and the home of Baron Winters, leader of the Night Force.
Xarapion, homeworld of Thar Dan, the inventor of the Dimensiometer belt given to the Shadow Thief.


== See also ==
List of DC Comics characters
List of DC Comics teams and organizations
List of alien races in DC Comics
List of criminal organizations in DC Comics
List of fictional towns in comics
List of government agencies in DC Comics
List of hidden races in DC Comics
List of objects in the DC Universe
Features of the Marvel Universe


== References ==