BYU Radio

BYU Radio is a talk radio station run by Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah.
Operating at Sirius XM channel 143 (and in northern Utah on 107.9, 89.1 MHz, and HD-2), it is known on-air as BYU Radio. The station features entertaining and informational talk programming.


== History ==
Prior to 2002, there was a satellite music format known as 'Bonneville International LDS Radio Network.' When Bonneville International decided to discontinue the format, it gave the station to BYU. The university continued adding programming to the station.
BYU Radio launched as a streaming radio on August 1, 2002. The original format featured a selection of music by artists who were members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints and alumni of Brigham Young University. A second stream, called BYU Radio Instrumental, launched in 2003. A third stream, BYU Radio International, launched in 2008 featuring Spanish- and Portuguese-language programming.
In 2006, KBYU-FM added a simulcast of BYU Radio on its HD Radio subchannel.
BYU Radio expanded its reach by finalizing an agreement with Dish Network to broadcast its programming on Channel 980. This is available to subscribers to the 'Top 120' or higher programming tier.On July 1, 2011, BYU Radio dropped its Church of Jesus Christ of latter-Day Saints themed inspirational music format and relaunched as a national talk-format station. BYU Radio began broadcasting on Sirius XM satellite radio, assigned to channel 143 on both the Sirius and XM lineup.On October 17, 2011, BYU discontinued two of its Internet streams: BYU Radio International and BYU Radio Instrumental. The university said listeners would stream the music as background music causing high bandwidth costs for BYU. Those two services were not broadcast on Dish or SiriusXM, and were only available online.On August 9, 2016, Greg Wrubell joined BYU as the Director of Broadcast Media. Among his responsibilities were moving BYU athletics flagship from KSL to BYU Radio and making his coaches shows turn into a TV/radio simulcast for BYUtv and the Nu Skin BYU Sports Network radio affiliates. With his new responsibilities at BYU Wrubell left KSL, though KSL remained part of the BYU Sports Networks affiliates. With the change BYU Radio officially became the flagship station for football, women's soccer, and men's basketball broadcasts, though ESPN 960 remains the flagship carrier of women's soccer matches that conflict with football or men's basketball broadcasts.On October 23, 2017, Brigham Young University announced that KBYU-FM would drop its classical music programming and become a full-time carrier of BYU Radio beginning June 30, 2018. However, on April 26, 2018, BYU backtracked on the plans following listener criticism of the planned flip, and announced its planned purchase of 107.9 KUMT to serve as a full-time outlet.


== Programming ==
The talk format reaches into Brigham Young University's depth of academic experts and topics. The station's slogan, "Together," reflects the station's mission to address the broad spectrum of listeners and their beliefs, bringing together all walks of life who have a desire to do good.
BYU Radio has a weekday line up of over 25 hours of original programming each week, which includes:

The Lisa Show: Host Lisa Valentine Clarks brings listeners fun and useful conversations and encouraging words.
BYU Sports Nation:  An hour of daily Cougar sports talk and analysis with Spencer Linton and Jarom Jordan.
Constant Wonder:  Host Marcus Smith shares conversations that invite listeners to discover, explore, and reengage with the wonders of our world.
Top of Mind, with Julie Rose: Smart, informative conversations and interviews that go beyond mere headlines and sound bites.
The Apple Seed:  Tellers and stories from the Timpanogos Storytelling Festival and around the world.
Sound Mined:  A show that helps listeners both discover and reconnect with music from many different genres and eras.
Worlds Awaiting: Helping build a lifelong love for literacy in children of all ages.
Highway 89:  A showcase of live music performances from BYU Radio's Studio 6.Through the Garage Door:  If you love rock & roll, you'll love this show.Treasure Island 2020: An audio telling of the book Treasure Island with some modern day twists. A sneak peek of the program aired October 5, 2019. The 10-part series begins airing every Monday on November 11, 2019.The station also carries inspirational programming, including BYU's campus devotionals live on Tuesdays, and Sunday programming consisting of audio from BYU Television programs and from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, including the long-running radio program Music and the Spoken Word.During the regular sports season, BYU Radio broadcasts live coverage of BYU football, women's soccer, and men's basketball games through the Nu Skin BYU Sports Network. The station also airs some BYU baseball (simulcast from ESPN 960) and airs some women's basketball games live.

The station streams online at http://www.byuradio.org/ and is also simulcast on TuneIn.


== References ==