Kameng River

The Kameng River (previously named Bhareli River, now called Kameng in Arunachal Pradesh and Jia Bhoreli in Assam) in the eastern Himalayan mountains, originates in Tawang district from the glacial lake below snow-capped Gori Chen mountain 27°48′36″N 92°26′38″E, elevation 6,300 metres (20,669 ft), on the India-Tibet border in South Tibet and flows through Bhalukpong circle of West Kameng District,  Arunachal Pradesh and Sonitpur District of Assam, India. It is one of the major tributaries of the Brahmaputra River, joining it at Tezpur, just east  of the Kolia Bhomora Setu bridge.The Kameng River is about 264 kilometres (164 mi) long. Its drainage basin is about 11,843 square kilometres (4,573 sq mi) large.The Kameng forms the boundary between East Kamemg District and West Kameng Districts  and is also the boundary between the Sessa and Eaglenest sanctuaries to its west and the Pakke tiger reserve to the east.  The Dafla Hills are east and the Aka Hills (home of Aka tribe) are west of the Kameng River. The entire stretch of forest along the  Bhalukpong–Bomdila highway on the west bank of the river in West Kameng has vanished in the last few years though the forest across the river continues to be in a healthy state.


== History ==
The Kameng river had an important historical significance. During the medieval period i.e. between 13th to early 16th century, it marked the borders  between the Chutiya kingdom and the Kamata kingdom. Later, in the 16th century, after the annexation of the Chutiya kingdom by the Ahoms and the downfall of Kamata kingdom, it acted as the border between the Ahom kingdom and Baro-Bhuyan rule.


== Tributaries ==
The eastern half of Eaglenest-Sessa Wildlife sanctuaries is drained by the Tippi Naala (Tippi River) which joins Kameng River at the village of Tippi on the Bhalukpong-Bomdila Highway. The other major rivers flowing through West Kameng District, the Tenga, Bichom and Dirang Chu, are tributaries of the Kameng.


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Kameng River on Wikimapia
Photo of Gorichen Peak