Carlos Cardoen

Carlos Remigio Cardoen Cornejo (born 1 May 1942, Santa Cruz, Chile) is a Chilean metallurgical engineer, weapons scientist and agricultural businessman.
Cardoen rose to prominence amidst the United States arms embargo against Chile, when he became in the 1980s "Pinochet's favourite arms manufacturer".When Saddam Hussein fell out of favour with the United States in connection with the 1990 invasion of Kuwait Cardoen, who had weapon dealings with Iraq, was accused by the US of zirconium trafficking. Since then he has been on the Interpol wanted list, yet United States has not asked for his extradition. On various occations Cardoen has received support from National Congress and the Minister of Foreign Affairs to end the Interpol arrest warrant.


== Weapons industry ==

As a weapons expert he ran FAMAE in the late 1980s. He allegedly illegally sold zirconium supplemented armaments to Iraq under the Saddam Regime, exported from the United States, for which he has an international arrest warrant. Yet, Cardoen claims the United States was aware and implicitly consented this trade until Saddam Hussein fell out of favour.During the height of the Beagle crisis in 1978 Cardoen was contacted by Chilean Air Force commander Fernando Matthei and designed on his request a light bomb, that could be dropped from any airforce plane, in only 15 days. When asking Matthei what did he want the bomb for, he reportedly answered: "para joder"' (to joke around)'.
Cardoen claims Iraq owes him 50 million USD from weapon purchases.


== Agriculture and tourism ==
From the 1990s onwards Cardoen has invested capital into the wine, energy, match, fruit juice and tourism businesses in Chile, especially in O'Higgins, his home region. Due to his involvement in cultural and tourism projects he has been awarded the "Premio a lo Chileno" in 2006 and "Orden al Mérito Docente y Cultural Gabriela Mistral" in 2005. He has been suffering from colon cancer for many years.


== See also ==
Iran-Contra
Fábricas y Maestranzas del Ejército de Chile


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Carlos Cardoen at Wikimedia Commons

Museo de Colchagua official website
El caso Irán-Corfo at the Wayback Machine (archived 27 October 2009)
"Orden de captura internacional". Archived from the original on 14 February 2005. Retrieved 23 April 2009.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)
The Chilean Connection
Sumario del Caso Cardoen
Cardoen Industries
"Scoop: Ecco come il Sismi doveva rapire Carlos Remigio Cardoen" ("Scoop: Here's how The Sismi was to kidnap Carlos Remigio Cardoen") (in Italian)