Maberly, Newfoundland and Labrador

Maberly locally  is a tiny coastal hamlet (called an outport in Newfoundland) at the end of route 238-II on the Bonavista Peninsula on the island of Newfoundland with a permanent year-round population of about 20. In the 1921 census, there were 83 inhabitants.  It has long been associated with nearby Elliston, being about 3 km from Elliston Centre by road, and was officially annexed by that town in the 1960s. Driving from Elliston Centre to Maberly, you pass through Sandy Cove and the Neck.


== Geography ==
Maberly is located by sea between the towns of Little Catalina and Elliston.  Among the named coves in Maberly as you enter the community are Thomas' Cove (48°37′14.43″N 53°00′51.48″W), Chris' Cove (48°37′13.26″N 53°00′48.05″W)  and Charlie's Cove (48°37′10.99″N 53°00′44.92″W). There is a small cove between Chris' Cove and Charlie's Cove which never seems to have been named (48°37′13.05″N 53°00′45.19″W) — at least not a name which stuck.


=== The coves and roads of Maberly ===
Thomas' Cove, just off the coast of which lies South (Suder) Bird Island (48°37′29.59″N 53°00′35.61″W), is the broadest of the coves and its shore is covered with relatively large beach stones; between Thomas' Cove and Chris' Cove there are cliffs and a small gulch; Chris' Cove, into which Muddy Brook empties, has a broad, flat bedrock formation which slopes into the ocean and received a government-sponsored slipway which fell into disrepair in the 1990s and has been removed; the aforementioned 'nameless cove' is on the other side of a tiny point of land; then there is a headland between this nameless cove and Charlie's Cove called The Gaze or often just over below. A gravel road climbs a much larger headland to the other side of Charlie's Cove, passing a steep-sided gulch and then peters out into the wilderness after several hundred metres and several houses. It is this road which now forms the beginning of the Little Catalina-Maberly walking trail. The coast rises to relatively steep cliffs with no harbour possibilities for several kilometres. Another rough road leaves the community on the inland side and quickly branches, the shorter branch being the gravel pit road in whose gravel pit several demolition derbies have been held and a much longer road which brings you out into Duke's Land (named for a man by the name of Marmaduke, not a nobleman).


=== Muddy Brook: the brook and the pond ===
The brook which flows through the community is still called Muddy Brook, reminiscent of the community's former name, and the brook flows from Muddy Brook Pond just below which is a wide steady which looks almost like another small pond. The road to Duke's Land brings you here. (48°36′26.35″N 53°01′35.32″W)


=== Regional Geography ===
Flowers Cove (48°36′32.17″N 53°00′22.59″W), named for the treacherous maritime rock shallows known as the 'Flowers' is within easy walking distance from the community along the Little Catalina-Maberly walking trail through some very productive and picturesque berry-picking grounds.  Northern (Noder) Bight is an abandoned community between Maberly and Little Catalina most of whose former inhabitants moved to Maberly or to Catalina from the 1850s to the 1890s. Residents of Maberly themselves mostly resettled to more central parts of Elliston or to Bonavista during the 1950s and 1960s.


== Settlement and early history ==
Maberly was originally called Muddy Brook and was first permanently settled by John Chaulk and his sons in or around 1806.


== Former Provincial Park ==
Just inside the entrance to Maberly, there is a look-out for the Bird Islands which was originally constructed as Maberly Provincial Park in the same category as Dungeon Provincial Park in Bonavista i.e. a day park for picnicking and, in Maberly's case, bird-watching. Elliston town council has assumed responsibility for the park and now there is a demonstration garden there and tourist poster boards describing topics such as root cellar construction and gardening in the area.


== Fishing grounds ==
Historically, the shoals in the area of Maberly were highly productive.


== Poetry ==
Maberly

We hear this spoken by some folk
Maberly soon will be
A ghost town with its industry
The Salt Cod Fishery.
No stages, boats nor fishing gear
Are seen along the shore
The old folks that once caught the cod
Are gone for evermore.
A lovely spot is Maberly
This hamlet by the sea
In summer when the tourist come
They love its scenery.
The marshes and the barrens too
Abound with berries wild
A source of income for the folks
And every boy and child.
People come from near and far
Those berries for to pick
With bakeapples in the early fall
They fill their buckets quick.
The partridgeberry industry
Alike for rich and poor
Is better here than anywhere
Along the Eastern shore.
The blueberry is scarce in quantity
Is still a source of wealth
And makes sweet wine for Christmas time
It's good too for one's health.
The folks grow all the crops they need
The land is fertile here
Potatoes are as good as seen
At any country fair.
Two miles of road connect this place
To the town of Elliston
Its upkeep by the government
Is very small when done.
The school bus no doubt cost a bit
Of dough to make it go
And then there is the snow plow
That clears the road of snow.
The electric lights along the road
And in our homes likewise
Are paid when due, we never fink
Though some say people try.
The facts that's stated here are true
We never will agree
To end our days away from home
In some locality.
We have good water near at hand
The best that can be found
And grazing land is plentiful
For cattle all around.
There's tons of hay that could be cut
For grass is plenty here
Enough to feed a thousand sheep
The people do declare.
Nature has provided us
With codfish in galore
And berries that are plentiful
No distance from our door.
Some of the folks that once lived here
Have settled now in town
They thought electric lights
Would never get around.
Now when they come to visit here
And see the old homestead
They view with envy those who stayed
Although they were in need.
Centralization may be best
When things are handled right
But dumping people everywhere
Is sure an awful sight.
What good is it to leave a place
Where plenty can be found
And live one's days in poverty
Within some busy town?
To move the houses from this place
Much money would be spent
Enough to buy an airplane
And cross the continent.
They say this twentieth century
Will see the end of time
If this is so we then will be
Within some other clime.
So when you look at it this way
And others stated here
Let us enjoy our heritage
The place we love so dear.
If Joey and his government
Would lend a helping hand
We'd make this place a paradise
The best in Newfoundland.
Canon Bailey named this place
From Bonavista town
A Godly man who loved to preach
To people all around.
We love it more because of him
And all of us agree
There is no better place to live
Than here in Maberly.
Aubrey Pearce (1894-1977)
Maberly ResidentTaken from www.rootcellars.com with permission.


== See also ==
List of communities in Newfoundland and Labrador
List of people of Newfoundland and Labrador


== References ==