George Wang (producer)

George Wang is an American film and television producer based in Los Angeles.  He is of Taiwanese , fluent in both English and Mandarin Chinese.  His brother Dawen Wang is a pop singer based in Taiwan.


== Career Beginnings ==
George Wang made his start in late 2009 working on the online video campaign to win $1 million for the Center for the Pacific Asian Family (CPAF) through the Chase Community Giving contest.  Together with Don Le and Adrian Zaw, under the tutelage of Teddy Zee, they produced over twenty videos featuring over 100 Asian American celebrities, reaching half a million views. The non-profit ended up in the top 20 out of 100 charities competing for the top prize, and ended up creating awareness for the widespread but generally unspoken issues of sexual assault and domestic violence.Wang followed up in early 2011 with producing his first short film, 3 Minutes with fellow producer Don Le and directed by Ross Ching.  Starring Harry Shum Jr. (Glee, Crazy Rich Asians) and Stephen “tWitch” Boss (So You Think You Can Dance, Step Up Movies), with Katrina Law (Spartacus, Arrow), 3 Minutes became Wang, Le, and Ching's breakout piece, going viral with over 1.5 million views online.  Chosen as Vimeo’s Staff Pick, “3 Minutes” was also screened at the Los Angeles Asian Pacific Film Festival in May of that same year, and screenings at the Newport Beach Film Festival and Geneva International Film Festival Tous Ecrans.From 2010 to 2012, Wang has collaborated and produced videos with noted talent such as Harry Shum Jr, Just Kidding Films, Poreotics, Wong Fu Productions, Kid David, Luigi, Tyler Shields, AJ Rafael, KevJumba, Jamie Chung, a web-series for Japanese pop idol Jin Akanishi, Taiwan pop star Dawen, and many others.  To date, his work has garnered well over 32 million views.


== TV & Film Work ==
In 2012, Wang began his transition to television as the Producer of the TV show Mashbox on Myx TV, with Teddy Zee serving as Executive Producer.  In 2013, Mashbox was nominated for a NAMIC Visions Award (National Association for Multi-ethnicity in Communications), in the category of Digital Media – Long Form.
Wang followed up Mashbox as the Supervising Producer for Season 3 of Short Notice, a TV series on Mnet America, a subsidiary of Korean giant CJ Entertainment.
At the same time, Wang started producing more commercial work and music videos. Highlights include content for Chevrolet, Aéropostale, State Farm Insurance, and the 2015 Telly Award-winning spot The Profiler, for DIRECTV. It was also during this period Wang began branching out into Asia, starting with Taiwan.
Additionally, Wang worked with his first Taiwan client, popular rock band Mayday 五月天, producing their music video Cang Jie 倉頡, shooting on locations throughout Nevada.
Continuing his work with Asian clients, Wang produced a promotional video for Universal Music China/Nettwerk artist Wanting Qu (曲婉婷), in support of her Say the Words Tour in 2014.Other notable projects in Asia include producing music videos for popular Universal Music Taiwan artists, Dawen Wang (王大文), including Kimberly Chen (陳芳語), Nana Lee (李千娜), Vanness Wu (吳建豪), and re-teaming with previous frequent collaborator Don Le on Vietnamese-American pop artist Mai Tiến Dũng’s music video, shot on location in Tokyo, Japan.Wang also produced two episodes in Taiwan for the award-winning (2015 Asian Television Awards – Best Adaptation of an Existing Format) Asia’s Got Talent (Season 1) in 2015 for FremantleMedia Asia.
In 2015, Wang worked on his first feature, The Jade Pendant, releasing in 2017, as an Associate Producer.  He followed in 2017 with his second feature, Snakehead (currently in post-production), directed by Evan Jackson Leong, producing the Taiwan segments, collaborating with producer and good friend Brian Yang.Currently, Wang is in development on various Chinese and Taiwanese projects.


== External links ==
Official Website
George Wang on IMDb


== References ==