Robert Gibson (wrestler)

Robert Gibson (born Ruben Gibson, July 19, 1958) is an American professional wrestler. He is best known as one-half of the tag team known as The Rock 'n' Roll Express, with Ricky Morton. He has competed in singles competition also, and has won various singles championships throughout his career.
In February, 2017, it was announced that the Rock 'n' Roll Express would be inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame in the class of 2017.  On March 31, 2017, in Orlando, Florida, the duo accepted this honor.  The ceremony was held the Friday night prior to Wrestlemania 33.


== Professional wrestling career ==


=== Early career (1975-1983) ===
Gibson started wrestling as Robert Gibson in 1977. His first match was against Eddie Sullivan. He was trained by his brother Ricky Gibson and teamed with Ricky in the southern independents.


=== The Rock 'N Roll Express (1983-2002) ===

In 1983, he formed the Rock 'N Roll Express with Ricky Morton. They feuded with The Midnight Express (Bobby Eaton and Dennis Condrey) in the USWA/CWA, and the feud carried over into the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA)'s Jim Crockett Promotions in 1985. They won the NWA Tag Title four times while there and feuded with the Four Horsemen, Ivan and Nikita Koloff, and the team of Rick Rude and Manny Fernandez. Even though he and Morton were of similar build and wrestled a similar style, Gibson was always booked as the stronger and more powerful of the two.
Gibson was injured in 1990 and when he returned to World Championship Wrestling (WCW) in 1991, Morton turned on him to join The York Foundation. They feuded and Gibson teamed with Tom Zenk, but had no success and soon left WCW. He rejoined Morton in Smoky Mountain Wrestling (SMW) and they feuded with the Heavenly Bodies led by Jim Cornette. Shortly before SMW's demise, Gibson turned heel and joined "Cornette's Army".
The team came back briefly First in the USWA, WWF in 1993 and then WCW in 1996. In 1998, they were part of the "NWA" angle in the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) for a brief period. The Rock n' Roll express were awarded the NWA tag team championships before losing them to the Headbangers a month later.
In 1998 he went on his own to wrestle for Extreme Championship Wrestling.
On February 12, 2000 he return to WCW as he lost to WCW World Television Champion Jim Duggan on WCW Saturday Night.
Their last run in a big federation was with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling when they were part of Vince Russo's Sports Entertainment Xtreme faction.


=== Later career (2002-present) ===

He also appeared at one Wrestle Birmingham show in 2002 as "Robert Fuller Jr.", pretending to be the son of veteran wrestler Robert Fuller, a gimmick also used by other wrestlers.
In late 2003/2004, Robert along with Ricky Morton, joined the newly formed "Original" Big Time Wrestling, under the banner of the All World Wrestling League.
From 2007 to 2009, he worked for Ultimate Wrestling, a promotion in his home town of Pensacola, Florida, where he was one half of the first ever Ultimate Wrestling Tag-team Champions with Bobby Doll. In September 2010 he returned to Ultimate Wrestling.
In 2014, The Rock-n-Roll Express was still wrestling on the independent circuit.In 2016, The Rock N' Roll Express made a special appearance as part of TNA's weekly televised program Impact Wrestling's Total Nonstop Deletion episode, where they took part in the Tag Team Apocalypto match along with other tag teams.
In February 2017, WWE played a video package of the Rock n' Roll Express and the announcement of their hall of fame induction set for pre-WrestleMania.The Rock N Roll Express participated in the 2019 edition of the Jim Crockett Cup, but were defeated by The Briscoe Brothers in the first round. During the NWA television tapings on October 1, 2019, they won the NWA World Tag Team Championship.The team made their New Japan Pro Wrestling debut during the Fighting Spirit Unleashed 2019 event, 3 events promoted by NJPW in the United States.


== Personal life ==
Gibson has acknowledged during a fund raising event at the Western Pennsylvania School for the Deaf  that he is a hearing child of deaf parents. He knows sign language and often speaks with his hands in the ring before his matches.
On September 15, 2006, his brother, Ricky Gibson, died. Robert's mother and father are also deceased. The WWE acknowledged the legends death on WWE.comRobert is engaged to Tami McMaster.
He is part owner of Zeke's Deep Sea Fishing tours in Orange Beach, Alabama.


== Championships and accomplishments ==
Appalachian Mountain Wrestling
AMW Tag Team Championship (1 time, current)
All-Pro Championship Wrestling
APCW Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Jason Gibson and Mike Youngblood (2)
All-Pro Wrestling
APW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
APW Tag Team Championship (1 time)
All-Star Wrestling
ASW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Morton
Jim Crockett Promotions
NWA World Tag Team Championship (Mid-Atlantic version) (4 times) – with Ricky Morton
Korean Pro-Wrestling Association
NWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Morton
NWA Mid Atlantic Championship Wrestling
MACW Tag Team Championship (4 times) - with Ricky Morton (3) and Brad Armstrong (1) 
Mid-South Wrestling Association (Tennessee)
MSWA Southern Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Ricky Morton
Mid-South Wrestling Association
Mid-South Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Ricky Morton
National Wrestling Alliance
NWA World Tag Team Championship (3 times, current) – with Ricky Morton1
NWA Hall of Fame (Class of 2006)
NWA Hollywood Wrestling
NWA Americas Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Gibson
NWA Mid-America / Continental Wrestling Association / Championship Wrestling Association
AWA Southern Tag Team Championship (5 times) – with Ricky Gibson (3), Bill Dundee (1), and Ricky Morton (1)
CWA Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Morton
CWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Morton
NWA Mid-America Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
NWA Mid-America Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Don Fargo
NWA Southwest
NWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Morton
NWA Wildside
NWA Wildside Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Morton
New Age Championship Wrestling
NACW Tag Team Championship (1 time)
Pro Wrestling eXpress
PWX Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Vince Kaplack
Pro Wrestling Illustrated
PWI ranked him #99 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the "PWI Years" in 2003
PWI ranked him #4 of the Top 100 Tag Teams of the "PWI Years" with Ricky Morton in 2003.
Smoky Mountain Wrestling
SMW Beat the Champ Television Championship (1 time)
SMW Tag Team Championship (10 times) – with Ricky Morton
Southeastern Championship Wrestling
NWA Southeastern Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Gibson
NWA Southeast United States Junior Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
Traditional Championship Wrestling
TCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Morton
Ultimate Championship Wrestling
UCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Ricky Morton
Ultimate Wrestling
Ultimate Wrestling Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Bobby Doll
United States Wrestling Association
USWA World Tag Team Championship (2 times) - with Ricky Morton
Viral Pro Wrestling
VPW Tag Team Championship (1 time, current) - with Ricky Morton
World Organization of Wrestling
WOW Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ricky Morton
Wrestling Observer Newsletter
Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 2014) – with Ricky Morton
WWE
WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2017 — with Ricky Morton)1One of their reigns began in Memphis, Tennessee, though the records are unclear as to which promotion they were wrestling for. Another reign began with them being awarded the title, though it is not revealed where they were awarded nor which promotion they were wrestling for at the time.


== References ==


== External links ==
Ruben Cain profile at CAGEMATCH.net
The Official Rock N' Roll Express web site Bookings, videos and pictures