Kananaskis Country

Kananaskis Country is a park system situated to the west of Calgary, Alberta, Canada, in the foothills and front ranges of the Canadian Rockies. The area is named for the Kananaskis River, which was named by John Palliser in 1858 after a Cree acquaintance.


== Access ==
Kananaskis Country can be accessed by four main highways that run into or through the area: Highway 40, a 66 km (41 mi) segment of the Bighorn Highway and also known as Kananaskis Trail; Highway 66, a 28 km (17 mi) highway originating near Bragg Creek known as Elbow Falls Trail; Highway 68, a 42 km (26 mi) gravel highway originating from the Trans-Canada Highway (Highway 1) known as Sibbald Creek Trail; and Highway 546, west of Turner Valley.


== Recreation and tourism ==

Kananaskis Country is noted for recreation and tourism. Recreation facilities in Kananaskis include several campgrounds, a golf course, a hotel, a holiday ranch, two alpine ski areas (Nakiska, which hosted alpine skiing and freestyle moguls skiing during the 1988 Winter Olympics and Fortress Mountain Resort and a competitive cross-country ski area, the Canmore Nordic Centre) that the public can use. The Canmore Nordic Centre was the venue for cross-country skiing events during the 1988 Winter Olympics. Most of the development is within Peter Lougheed Provincial Park and along the highway 40 corridor that parallels the Kananaskis River. Kananaskis has many kilometres of hiking, cross-country ski, and horse trails. Other activities popular in Kananaskis include mountain biking, scrambling, climbing, backpacking, hunting, and fishing.


=== Parks ===

Several parks and campgrounds and one ecological reserve are located within Kananaskis. These include:

Bluerock Wildland Provincial Park
Bow Valley Provincial Park
Bow Valley Wildland Provincial Park
Bragg Creek Provincial Park
Canmore Nordic Centre Provincial Park
Don Getty Wildland Provincial Park
Elbow-Sheep Wildland Provincial Park
Peter Lougheed Provincial Park
Plateau Mountain Ecological Reserve
Sheep River Provincial Park
Spray Valley Provincial ParkSpecial areas within Kananaskis Country that are not formally designated as parks or ecological reserves include the Bow Corridor Area, the Elbow River Valley Area, Evan-Thomas Provincial Recreation Area, the Highwood/Cataract Areas, Sentinel Provincial Recreation Area, Stoney Creek Provincial Recreation Area, Strawberry Provincial Recreation Area and the Sibbald Area (Sibbald Lake Provincial Recreation Area, Sibbald Meadows Pond Provincial Recreation Area).


== Administration ==
On a provincial level, Kananaskis Country has been administered since 1945 as Improvement District No. 5 (Kananaskis). It was established by the Municipal Affairs branch of the Alberta Government for multiple uses including timber harvesting, gas and oil extraction, cattle grazing, recreation and tourism. All activities are planned and facilities are developed with watershed protection as a priority.
Not all areas of Kananaskis Country are covered by the same measure of protection. Areas within Kananaskis Country include Provincial Parks, Provincial Recreation Areas, Wildland Provincial Parks, Ecological Reserves and Crown land. All of the aforementioned categories are governed by differing laws.
A management plan approved in March 2003 by the Kananaskis Country restricts further development in the Spray Valley Provincial Park area, in order to preserve the ecological integrity. Restrictions were imposed on off-road vehicles, snowmobiles, horseback riding and biking, however a site in the Spray Valley is considered for the construction of a small lodge.


== Special facilities ==
A University of Calgary ecological and environmental research station is located nearby, at Barrier Lake. A "Tim Horton Children's Foundation" summer camp is also located in the area. Easter Seals Camp Horizon is located within Kananaskis along Highway 66. William Watson Lodge, a facility for people with disabilities, seniors, and their families is located in Peter Lougheed Provincial Park.


== 28th G8 Summit in Canada ==

On June 26 and June 27, 2002, the area hosted the 28th G8 Summit. This annual "Group of 8" Summit was held in Kananaskis Village at the Kananaskis Resort (also called the "Delta Lodge at Kananaskis"). This was the second time Canada used a lodge venue for the G8 Summit, after its inaugural 7th G7 Summit at Montebello, Quebec in 1981. So far, it is the only G8 Summit to be held in western Canada. The 2002 conference pumped some $300-million into the Kananaskis and Alberta economy; however, security cost taxpayers in excess of $200-million.


== Climate ==
Kananaskis experiences a subarctic climate (Köppen climate classification Dfc).


== Photo gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		


== See also ==
The Canadian Rockies Trail Guide
Scrambles in the Canadian Rockies
List of Alberta provincial parks


== References ==


== External links ==

Kananaskis Country
Kananaskis Improvement District