Kamen Rider (1971 TV series)

Kamen Rider (仮面ライダー, Kamen Raidā, Masked Rider) is a tokusatsu superhero television series and weekly science fiction manga created by manga artist Shotaro Ishinomori. It debuted on television on April 3, 1971, and ran until February 10, 1973, airing on the Mainichi Broadcasting System and NET (now TV Asahi). The manga adaptation was also featured in Shōnen Magazine around the same period. The series has evolved into a franchise with many subsequent annual iterations. 


== Story ==
The series takes place in a world plagued by Shocker, a mysterious worldwide terrorist organization formed by remaining members of the Nazis. To further its plans for world domination, Shocker recruited its agents through kidnapping, turning their victims into mutant cyborgs and, ultimately, brainwashing them. However, one victim named Takeshi Hongo escaped just before the final brainwashing. With his sanity and moral conscience intact, Takeshi battled Shocker's minions as the grasshopper-themed altered human (改造人間, kaizō ningen) superhero Kamen Rider. Another victim of the altered human process, freelance photographer Hayato Ichimonji, became Kamen Rider 2 after Kamen Rider, who renamed himself as "Kamen Rider 1", saved him from Shocker's brainwashing. Assisted by motorcycle race team manager Tobei Tachibana and FBI agent Kazuya Taki, the Kamen Riders fought in both solo and partnered missions against Shocker and its successor organization, Gel-Shocker.


== Manga ==
Many manga based on the original Kamen Rider series have been published, but only one was penned and drawn by Ishinomori himself. Ishinomori was also the author of one chapter of the Kamen Rider Amazon manga and the entire Kamen Rider Black manga.  However, those manga were based on sequels to Kamen Rider, rather than the original series.
The original manga, published in 1971, initially follows a path resembling the first few episodes of the TV series, from basic plot to creature designs. However, when Takeshi leaves the story, the series diverge greatly. In the TV show, Takeshi travels abroad to fight Shocker in other countries, leaving Japan's protection to Hayato Ichimonji, a freelance cameraman who was experimented on by Shocker but saved by Takeshi, becoming the second Kamen Rider. In the manga, Takeshi never left Japan. He was confronted by twelve "Shocker Riders" and was subsequently mortally wounded during his battle against them. Hayato Ichimonji, one of the twelve Shocker Riders, receives a head injury during the fight and regains his conscience as a result. He then turns against Shocker and takes Takeshi's role as Kamen Rider. In spite of the damage to his body, Takeshi's brain survives and guides Hayato, the two fighting as one.
Takeshi eventually returns as a Rider in both stories, but starting with Hayato's debut, villains and even basic story development greatly diverge between the two versions. The manga portrays a seemingly hopeless battle against Shocker, an organization with ties to governmental conspiracies that seems much bigger than either of the two Riders. The live action TV shows portray the Riders as heroes strong enough to bring down Shocker, only to see it replaced by similar organizations led by Shocker's mysterious leader. The Shocker Riders eventually appear in the TV series, too, but they looked different and had different abilities. There were also only six Shocker Riders, rather than the manga's 12.


== Characters ==


=== Kamen Riders ===
Takeshi Hongo/Kamen Rider 1 (本郷 猛/仮面ライダー1号, Hongō Takeshi/Kamen Raidā Ichigō, 1-13, 40, 41, 49 & 51-98): The first main protagonist. A biochemist at Jounan University who also races motorcycles as part of the Tachibana Racing Club.
Hayato Ichimonji/Kamen Rider 2 (一文字 隼人/仮面ライダー2号, Ichimonji Hayato/Kamen Raidā Nigō, 14-52, 72, 73, 93, 94 & 98): The other main protagonist. A freelance photographer who becomes Kamen Rider 2 after Takeshi saves him from Shocker.


=== Allies ===
Tōbei Tachibana (立花 藤兵衛, Tachibana Tōbee): Takeshi's racing mentor and confidant. He is often called "Oyassan" by other members of his racing club. He runs a small café named Snack Amigo where Takeshi and other members of Tachibana's racing club gather in early episodes, and its employees occasionally assist Takeshi in countering Shocker's plans. At the same time as Takeshi's departure, he opens a motorcycle goods shop named Tachibana Auto Corner and sets up the Tachibana Racing Club.
Kazuya Taki (滝 和也, Taki Kazuya, 11, 13-19, 21-82 & 84-98): An FBI agent assigned to investigate Shocker activities in Japan. While not himself a cyborg, Kazuya was skilled in martial arts, and often used them alongside both Kamen Riders to battle the foot-soldiers who invariably accompanied a Shocker agent.
Professor Hiroshi Midorikawa (緑川 弘, Midorikawa Hiroshi, 1): Takeshi's teacher in university and an authority on biochemistry. He is a Shocker scientist, but freed Takeshi and was killed by Spider Man, an agent of Shocker.
Ruriko Midorikawa (緑川 ルリ子, Midorikawa Ruriko, 1-13): The daughter of Professor Midorikawa, she initially blames Takeshi for her father's death, but eventually learns the truth and becomes his ally. In episode 14, it is revealed that she accompanied Takeshi on his quest to defeat Shocker activities in Europe.
Hiromi Nohara (野原 ひろみ, Nohara Hiromi, 1, 2, 4-25 & 34): Ruriko's fellow student, who works as a waitress at Snack Amigo.
Shiro (史郎, Shirō, 2 & 4-25): A bartender at Snack Amigo.
Rider Girls (ライダーガールズ, Raidā Gāruzu): Female members of the Tachibana Racing Club who assist both Kamen Riders.
Yuri (ユリ, 14-59, 61-64, 66, 67 & 69-98): Hiromi's friend, who is a karate expert.
Mari (マリ, 14-25 & 29-38): Hiromi's friend, who has experience in fencing.
Michi (ミチ, 14-18, 20, 21, 24 & 25): Hiromi's friend, who has experience in aikido and is a small-displacement rider.
Emi (エミ, 40-66 & 68): Takeshi's assistant from Switzerland, who has experience in aikido.
Mika (ミカ, 40-52): Takeshi's assistant from Switzerland, who is good at fortune-telling with playing cards.
Tokko (トッコ, 53-69): She is in charge of cooking in the Tachibana Racing Club.
Yokko (ヨッコ, 70-98): After the Boy Kamen Rider Corps was set up, she is in charge of communication and administration.
Choko (チョコ, 70-98): She likes chocolate.
Goro Ishikura (石倉 五郎, Ishikura Gorō, 14-62 & 65): A bright boy who frequents the Tachibana Racing Club.
Boy Kamen Rider Corps (少年仮面ライダー隊, Shōnen Kamen Raidā-tai): A nationwide organization, with Tobei as the president and Kazuya as the leader, that is composed of boys and girls in episode 74.
Naoki & Mitsuru (ナオキ&ミツル, 62-64, 68-70 & 72-98): Boys who serve as leading members.


=== Shocker ===
Shocker (ショッカー, Shokkā) is a terrorist organization formed by former Nazis. Its name is an acronym for "Sacred Hegemony Of Cycle Kindred Evolutional Realm", as revealed in the movie reboot. Shocker's goal is to conquer the world. To this end, their scientists turn humans into superhuman cyborgs by surgically altering them with animal DNA and robotic cybernetics. Virtually all of its members are modified the same way. Even a Shocker grunt is tougher, faster, and stronger than an ordinary human civilian. The original manga showed that Shocker had influence over the governments of the world. Its founders had ties to the Nazis, Illuminati and the Kamen Rider Spirits manga makes references to the group's support by the Badan Empire.
Ruthless and merciless, Shocker would often kidnap prominent scientists and force them to work for the organization, then kill them when their usefulness was at an end, or if they attempted to escape. The decision to kidnap and modify college student Takeshi Hongo proved to be their undoing. He was intended to be another of Shocker's powerful cyborg warriors, a grasshopper-human hybrid, but he escaped and opposed them as Kamen Rider 1. A later attempt to create a second, more powerful Kamen Rider backfired when the intended victim, Hayato Ichimonji, was rescued by the original Rider before he was brainwashed. Hayato joined Takeshi as Kamen Rider 2. The pair, known as the Double Riders, put an end to Shocker, and later its remnants, who formed Gel-Shocker after their first defeat.
In OOO, Den-O, All Riders: Let's Go Kamen Riders, Shocker, although with a membership and leadership covering Gel-Shocker members from the original TV series, obtained a Core Medal and modified it into the Shocker Medal. Though they were originally unable to use it, the appearance of the Greeed Ankh in their time enabled the organization to obtain one of his Cell Medals and create the Shocker Greeed. This altered time so that Shocker defeated the Double Riders and managed to conquer all of Japan and eventually the world, setting up a union with many of the other organizations that originally emerged after Shocker's destruction. The group is ultimately defeated by the Kamen Riders.
But as revealed in Kamen Rider OOO onwards, there are some surviving members of the Shocker organization, even from Badan Empire who went into hiding to gather data of the Kamen Riders' battles against some of their respective kaijin many years ago. But during the events of Super Hero Taisen GP: Kamen Rider 3, Shocker's remaining scientists created a History Modification Machine that they use to send a time displaced cyborg called Kamen Rider 3 back in time to destroy the Double Riders in the aftermath of Gel-Shocker's defeat, creating a new timeline where Shocker rules the world with some Kamen Riders in their service. Luckily, the apparent destruction of the History Modification Machine restores the timeline (with the exception of Go Shijima/Kamen Rider Mach who was killed by Cheetahkatatsumuri), only to be found out during the events of D-Video Special: Kamen Rider 4 that Shocker secretly uses it to create time loops and alters the timeline once more, allowing to create Kamen Rider 4, as well as  the revalation that they have been targeting Takumi Inui, due to his sacrifice-less wish to ensure that no one dies like what happened to one of his old allies to create a loop. As Takumi is about to destroy the machine, the Great Leader of Shocker appears with an appearance identical to Takumi's. In the end, Takumi destroys the machine and disappears alongside the modified timeline, restored back to its original timeline once more. Though most of his allies who do not originate from the Kamen Rider 555 TV series like from Kamen Rider Drive, and even Kamen Rider Den-O's Kamen Rider Zeronos don't remember if they had encountered Takumi, only some of Takumi's old friends from the Kamen Rider 555 TV series, including Naoya Kaido still remember Takumi. 
In the movie Kamen Rider 1, there is a civil war between the original Shocker and a newly formed organization called Nova Shocker in an attempt to kidnap Mayu, Tobei Tachibana's granddaughter, and release the Alexander the Great Gamma Eyecon from her body, in order to obtain its power. As all of the revived Ambassador Hell's Shocker fraction had been annihilated completely, leaving only himself, and also after he witnessed how dangerous the Alexander Gamma Eyecon is, he makes an uneasy alliance with Kamen Riders Ghost, Specter and a newly improved Kamen Rider 1.

Great Leader of Shocker (ショッカー首領, Shokkā Shuryō): The high ruler of the organization and main antagonist of the series. He appears for the first time in short video footage shown in episode 34, although his appearance there is mostly hidden by shadows. He talks with his followers through speakers on Shocker's emblems in the multiple outposts. The Great Leader is a cruel being who does not have qualms in sacrificing his minions during moments of crisis or failure. He takes various forms, his first being a cyclopean gorgon in crimson robes in the original series, his second being a skeletal creature in Kamen Rider V3, following a skull-faced insect who lead a mini-restoration of Shocker known as Black Satan, and his true form is known as the Great Leader Rock (岩石大首領, Ganseki Daishuryō) in Kamen Rider Stronger a giant humanoid rock man controlled by a large one-eyed cybernetic brain.
Colonel Zol/Werewolf (ゾル大佐/狼男, Zoru-taisa/Ōkami Otoko, 26-39, Kamen Rider vs. Shocker & V3 27 & 28) (a.k.a. Gold Werewolf (黄金狼男, Ōgon Ōkami Otoko)): From Shocker's Middle East branch, his true form was a wolflike monster. He was also a disguise specialist, able to mimic Taki's appearance almost perfectly using only make up during his debut. His personal mark, worn by the soldiers of his own Shocker outpost and used in his official correspondence, was the Shocker emblem, but with the bird's head replaced by a wolf's. He confronted Kamen Rider 2 himself in episode 39 and after a lengthy fight was toppled off a cliff by Kamen Rider 2's Rider Punch, destroying him. Gold Werewolf briefly appeared in Kamen Rider vs Shocker among the members of the resurrected monster army. In Kamen Rider V3, episode 27, Colonel Zol is resurrected alongside the other 3 great Shocker and Gel-Shocker commanders from the original TV series by Destron. He aims to become a Destron commander, replacing Doctor G. However, in episode 28, after Kamen Rider V3 escaped from Destron's base, a self-destruction sequence was activated, and Colonel Zol was unable to escape, dying again with it. In the Kamen Rider Spirits manga, he is revived with other Shocker commanders as a soulless pawn of the Badan Empire.
Doctor Shinigami/Ikadevil' (死神博士/イカデビル, Shinigami-hakase/Ikadebiru, 40-52, Kamen Rider vs. Shocker, 61, 63 & 68, V3 27 & 28, Decade: All Riders vs Great-Shocker & Let's Go Kamen Riders): From Shocker's branch in Switzerland, he took over Japan's command after Zol's death until Ambassador Hell appeared. However, he returned to Japan in episode 61, working together with Ambassador Hell and also attempting his own plans. He had cold and calculating behavior. In episode 68, he captured Tobei to help train him for his battle with Kamen Rider 1, but that only resulted in Tobei learning about his weakness. Discarding his cape when he faced Takeshi for the last time, Shinigami assumed his squidlike monster form to fight Rider 1 with his tentacle whip, while Hayato was held off by the Shocker Combatmen. With Tobei's guidance, Kamen Rider 1 managed to overpower Ikadevil and weaken him with a Rider Chop before sending Ikadevil falling to his death with his Rider Tailspin Shoot. Ikadevil tried to rise once more, only to fall down and explode. Doctor Shinigami was resurrected by Destron in Kamen Rider V3, episode 27, and speculated about how he had been brought back to replace Doctor G, only to learn that he was there just for a new operation. Shortly afterwards, in episode 28, he died when Destron's base accidentally self-destructed. He is revived as a soulless pawn of the Badan Empire alongside Colonel Zol and Ambassador Hell in the Kamen Rider Spirits manga.
'Ambassador Hell/Garagaranda (地獄大使/ガラガランダ, Jigoku-taishi/Garagaranda, 53-62, 64-67, Kamen Rider vs. Ambassador Hell & 69-79, V3 27 & 28, Decade: All Riders vs Great-Shocker & Let's Go Kamen Riders): Summoned from Shocker's branch in Southeast Asia, he took command of the organization in Japan. His true name was Damon (ダモン) according to Kamen Rider Spirits. He used an electromagnetic whip and an iron claw as his weapons. In episode 79, after capturing the Riders' friends, he called Hongo out as he assumed his rattlesnake-like monster form, able to burrow underground and use his whip arm as a weapon. Kamen Rider 1 battled Garagaranda while Kazuya freed Tobei and the others, managing to use his Rider Kick on the monster. Reverting to his normal mode, Hell cursed the Riders and screamed to Shocker's perseverance before he died, exploding. Afterwards, the Great Leader destroyed the original Shocker. In spite of his failure, Ambassador Hell was resurrected by Destron in Kamen Rider V3, episode 27. In episode 28, his sneaky behavior ended up leading to the prisoner V3 capturing him and escaping from the Destron base. Soon afterwards, Ambassador Hell returned to the base, only to die in its self-destruction. Ambassador Hell returns in the Kamen Rider Spirits manga, working for the Badan Empire. But his difference among the other revived members is that he had his own consciousness, and it is revealed that the Silver Skull used to revive him is capable of bringing back the dead person's memories. In Kamen Rider ZX, Ambassador Darkness, Ambassador Hell's younger cousin, appeared as a Badan Empire leader.
Shocker Combatmen (ショッカー戦闘員, Shokkā Sentōin): Black uniformed soldiers, some of which have skeleton markings on their torsos. They are normally easily defeated by the Riders, often without even needing to transform. Their trademark is a high pitched battle-cry.
Big Machine (ビッグマシン, Biggu Mashin): A character who only appears in Ishinomori's original Kamen Rider manga. Big Machine is Shocker's highest commander and main antagonist in the manga. He also seems to be the one called "Great Leader" by some of the lower ranking Shocker members. He has a fully mechanized body and is behind Shocker's "October Project", which involves using a supercomputer to brainwash the population of Japan. He's able to match up the Riders in combat and launch attacks that disrupt electronic equipment, including Rider 1's and 2's own bodies. The design of his body was the base of Ambassador Hell's design in the TV show, although it was altered to allow a human face and, unlike Big Machine, Ambassador Hell was kept a separate character from the Leader of Shocker. In Kamen Rider × Super Sentai: Super Hero Taisen, Big Machine is reimagined as a project of the Shocker/Zangyack Alliance to create a giant robot from the Crisis Fortress and the Gigant Horse.


=== Gel-Shocker ===
Gel-Shocker (ゲルショッカー, Geru-Shokkā) was formed after the destruction of Shocker, with the remnants of the organization absorbing another organization Geldam (ゲルダム団, Gerudamu-dan) based in Africa. After Ambassador Hell's defeat, The Great Leader reorganized the organization from the ground up, destroying all remaining secret bases and even liquidating the remaining troop contingent in a bloody forest massacre witnessed by unfortunate campers. Gel-Shocker troopers wore bright purple and yellow costumes, were capable of traveling from one place to another by transforming into sheets that would drop down onto unsuspecting victims, and were capable of taking more blunt abuse than their predecessors.
Gel-Shocker was led by the Great Leader of Gel-Shocker (ゲルショッカー首領, Geru-Shokkā Shuryō) and General Black (ブラック将軍, Burakku-shōgun), a commander originally from Geldam who had a monstrous leech/chameleon hybrid form called Hiruchameleon (ヒルカメレオン, Hirukamereon) who had the ability to suck blood by hugging humans, which was later used to revive Gel-Shocker Kaijin after already being defeated by the Double Riders, throwing leeches which cause the target to follow his orders, and turn himself invisible. Later, he fought the Double Riders on a roller coaster and was defeated by their Rider Double Chop while turned invisible. Weakened, he reverted to his human form and cursed the Double Riders before exploding. Eventually, General Black was resurrected and worked for Destron in an important operation, but ended up dying in the self-destruction of a Destron base. Black returned as a soulless pawn of the Badan Empire in the Kamen Rider Spirits manga, but he was defeated by a Rider Double Kick performed by Kamen Riders 2 and ZX.


== Episode list ==
The Mysterious Spider Man (怪奇蜘蛛男, Kaiki Kumo Otoko) (Original Airdate: April 3, 1971)
The Terrifying Bat Man (恐怖蝙蝠男, Kyōfu Kōmori Otoko) (Original Airdate: April 10, 1971)
Monster, Scorpion Man (怪人さそり男, Kaijin Sasori Otoko) (Original Airdate: April 17, 1971)
Man-Eating Sarracenian (人喰いサラセニアン, Hitokui Sarasenian) (Original Airdate: April 24, 1971)
Monster, Mantis Man (怪人かまきり男, Kaijin Kamakiri Otoko) (Original Airdate: May 1, 1971)
Grim Reaper, Chameleon (死神カメレオン, Shinigami Kamereon) (Original Airdate: May 8, 1971)
Duel With Grim Reaper Chameleon! World Fair Impression (死神カメレオン決闘！万博跡, Shinigami Kamereon Kettō! Banpaku Ato) (Original Airdate: May 15, 1971)
Strangeness! Bee Woman (怪異！蜂女, Kaii! Hachi Onna) (Original Airdate: May 22, 1971)
The Terrifying Cobra Man (恐怖コブラ男, Kyōfu Kobura Otoko) (Original Airdate: May 29, 1971)
The Revived Cobra Man (よみがえるコブラ男, Yomigaeru Kobura Otoko) (Original Airdate: June 5, 1971)
Bloodsucking Monster, Gebacondor (吸血怪人ゲバコンドル, Kyūketsu Kaijin Gebakondoru) (Original Airdate: June 12, 1971)
Murder, Yamogelas (殺人ヤモゲラス, Satsujin Yamogerasu) (Original Airdate: June 19, 1971)
Tokageron and the Big Monster Army (トカゲロンと怪人大軍団, Tokageron to Kaijin Dai Gundan) (Original Airdate: June 26, 1971)
Raid of the Demon Sabotegron (魔人サボテグロンの襲来, Majin Saboteguron no Shūrai) (Original Airdate: July 3, 1971)
Counterattack, Sabotegron (逆襲サボテグロン, Gyakushū Saboteguron) (Original Airdate: July 10, 1971)
Wrestler of the Devil, Pirasaurus (悪魔のレスラーピラザウルス, Akuma no Resurā Pirazaurusu) (Original Airdate: July 17, 1971)
Death Match in the Ring: Defeat! Pirasaurus (リングの死闘倒せ！ピラザウルス, Ringu No Shitō Taose! Pirazaurusu) (Original Airdate: July 24, 1971)
Fossil Man: Hitodanger (化石男ヒトデンジャー, Kaseki-Otoko Hitodenjā) (Original Airdate: July 31, 1971)
Monster Kanibubbler Appears in Hokkaido (怪人カニバブラー北海道に現る, Kaijin Kanibaburā Hokkaidō ni Arawaru) (Original Airdate: August 7, 1971)
Fire-Breathing Caterpillar Monster: Dokugander (火を吹く毛虫怪人ドクガンダー, Hi o Fuku Kemushi Kaijin Dokugandā) (Original Airdate: August 14, 1971)
Dokugander, Confrontation at Osaka Castle (ドクガンダー　大阪城の対決！, Dokugandā Ōsaka-jō no Taiketsu!) (Original Airdate: August 21, 1971)
Suspicious Merman Amazonia (怪魚人アマゾニア, Kai Kyojin Amazonia) (Original Airdate: August 28, 1971)
Sky-Flying Monster Musasabedol (空飛ぶ怪人ムササビードル, Soratobu Kaijin Musasabīdoru) (Original Airdate: September 4, 1971)
Deadly Poison Monster Kinokomolg's Sortie! (猛毒怪人キノコモルグの出撃！, Mōdoku Kaijin Kinokomorugu no Shutsugeki!) (Original Airdate: September 11, 1971)
Defeat Kinokomolg! (キノコモルグを倒せ！, Kinokomorugu o Taose!) (Original Airdate: September 18, 1971)
The Terrifying Antlion (恐怖のあり地獄, Kyōfu no Arijigoku) (Original Airdate: September 25, 1971)
Mukadelas Monster Classroom (ムカデラス怪人教室, Mukaderasu Kaijin Shōshitsu) (Original Airdate: October 2, 1971)
Underground Monster Mogurang (地底怪人モグラング, Chitei Kaijin Mogurangu) (Original Airdate: October 9, 1971)
Electric Monster Kuragedall (電気怪人クラゲダール, Denki Kaijin Kuragedāru) (Original Airdate: October 16, 1971)
Revived Fossil, Bloodsucking Trilobite (よみがえる化石吸血三葉虫, Yomegaeru Kaseki Kyūketsu San'yōchū) (Original Airdate: October 23, 1971)
Deathmatch! Anteater Demon Arigabari (死斗！ありくい魔人アリガバリ, Shitō! Arikui Majin Arigabari) (Original Airdate: October 30, 1971)
Cannibalism Flower, Dokudalian (人喰い花ドクダリアン, Hitokui Hana Dokudarian) (Original Airdate: November 6, 1971)
Steel Monster, Armadillong (鋼鉄怪人アルマジロング, Kōtetsu Kaijin Arumajirongu) (Original Airdate: November 13, 1971)
Japan in Danger! Gamagiller's Invasion (日本危うし！ガマギラーの侵入, Nihon Ayaushi! Gamagirā no Shinnyū) (Original Airdate: November 20, 1971)
Murderous Ant Queen, Archimedes (殺人女王蟻アリキメデス, Satsujin Joōari Arikimedesu) (Original Airdate: November 27, 1971)
Resurrected Mummy Monster, Egyptus (いきかえったミイラ怪人エジプタス, Ikikaetta Miira Kaijin Ejiputasu) (Original Airdate: December 4, 1971)
Poisonous Gas Monster Trickabuto's G-Plan (毒ガス怪人トリカブトのＧ作戦, Dokugasu Kaijin Torikabuto no Jī Sakusen) (Original Airdate: December 11, 1971)
Lightning Monster Eiking's World Darkness Plan (稲妻怪人エイキングの世界暗黒作戦, Inazuma Kaijin Eikingu no Sekai Ankoku Sakusen) (Original Airdate: December 18, 1971)
Monster Wolf Man's Huge Murder Party (怪人狼男の殺人大パーティー, Kaijin Ōkami Otoko no Satsujin Dai Pātī) (Original Airdate: December 25, 1971)
Deathmatch! Monster Snowman vs. Two Riders (死斗！怪人スノーマン対二人のライダー, Shitō! Kaijin Sunōman Tai Futari no Raidā) (Original Airdate: January 1, 1972)
Magma Monster Ghoster, Decisive Battle at Sakurajima (マグマ怪人ゴースター 桜島大決戦, Maguma Kaijin Gōsutā Sakurajima Dai Kessen) (Original Airdate: January 8, 1972)
The Devil's Messenger, Mysterious Fly Man (悪魔の使者　怪奇ハエ男, Akuma no Shisha Kaiki Hae Otoko) (Original Airdate: January 15, 1972)
Mysterious Birdman Pranodon's Attack (怪鳥人プラノドンの襲撃, Kai Chōjin Puranodon no Shūgeki) (Original Airdate: January 22, 1972)
Graveyard Monster, Kabibinga (墓場の怪人カビビンガ, Hakaba no Kaijin Kabibinga) (Original Airdate: January 29, 1972)
Monster Namewhale's Gas Explosion Plan (怪人ナメクジラのガス爆発作戦, Kaijin Namekujira no Gasu Bakuhatsu Sakusen) (Original Airdate: February 5, 1972)
Showdown!! Snow Mountain Monster Bearconger (対決！！雪山怪人ベアーコンガー, Taiketsu!! Yukiyama Kaijin Beākongā) (Original Airdate: February 12, 1972)
The Death-Calling Ice Devil Todogiller (死を呼ぶ氷魔人トドギラー, Shi o Yobu Kōri Majin Todogirā) (Original Airdate: February 19, 1972)
Bloodsucking Marshes of Hiruguerilla (吸血沼のヒルゲリラ, Kyūketsu Numa no Hirugerira) (Original Airdate: February 26, 1972)
Cannibalistic Monster, Isoginchack (人喰い怪人イソギンチャック, Hitokui Kaijin Isoginchakku) (Original Airdate: March 4, 1972)
Monster Kamestone's Murderous Aurora Program (怪人カメストーンの殺人オーロラ計画, Kaijin Kamesutōn no Satsujin Ōrora Keikaku) (Original Airdate: March 11, 1972)
Stone Monster Unicornos vs. Double Rider Kick (石怪人ユニコルノス対ダブルライダーキック, Ishi Kaijin Yunikorunosu Tai Daburu Raidā Kikku) (Original Airdate: March 18, 1972)
My Name is Mysterious Birdman Gilgalass (おれの名は　怪鳥人ギルガラスだ！, Ore no Na wa Kai Chōjin Girugarasu) (Original Airdate: March 25, 1972)
Monster Jaguarman's Ready-to-Die Motorbike War (怪人ジャガーマン決死のオートバイ戦, Kaijin Jagāman Kesshi Ōtobai Ikusa) (Original Airdate: April 1, 1972)
Sea Serpent Man of the Phantom Village (ユウレイ村の海蛇男, Yūrei Mura no Umihebi Otoko) (Original Airdate: April 8, 1972)
Cockroach Man!! The Terrifying Bacterial Ad-Balloon (ゴキブリ男！恐怖の細菌アドバルーン, Gokiburi Otoko!! Kyōfu no Saikin Adobarūn) (Original Airdate: April 15, 1972)
Amazon's Poison Butterfly Gireera (アマゾンの毒蝶ギリーラ, Amazon no Doku Chō Girīra) (Original Airdate: April 22, 1972)
Tsuchigumo Man Poisonmondo (土ぐも男ドクモンド, Tsuchigumo Otoko Dokumondo) (Original Airdate: April 29, 1972)
Monster Poison Lizard, Duel in Fear Valley!! (怪人毒トカゲ　おそれ谷の決闘！！, Kaijin Doku Tokage Osore Tani no Kettō!!) (Original Airdate: May 6, 1972)
The Bottomless Swamp Monster, Earthworm Man! (底なし沼の怪人ミミズ男！, Sokonashi Numa no Kaijin Mimizu Otoko!) (Original Airdate: May 13, 1972)
Mysterious Owl Man's Murderous X-Rays (怪奇フクロウ男の殺人レントゲン, Kaiki Fukurō Otoko no Satsujin Rentogen) (Original Airdate: May 20, 1972)
Monster Catfishgiller's Electric Hell (怪人ナマズギラーの電気地獄, Kaijin Namazugirā no Denki Jigoku) (Original Airdate: May 27, 1972)
Monster Hedgehoras' Murder Skull Plan (怪人ハリネズラス　殺人どくろ作戦, Kaijin Harinezurasu Satsujin Dokuro Sakusen) (Original Airdate: June 3, 1972)
Monster Rhinogang's Autorace of Death (怪人サイギャング　死のオートレース, Kaijin Saigyangu Shi no Ōtorēsu) (Original Airdate: June 10, 1972)
Monster Cicadaminga's Song to Kill Everyone (怪人セミミンガ　みな殺しのうた！, Kaijin Semiminga Mina Koroshi no Uta) (Original Airdate: June 17, 1972)
Monster Dr. Insect and the Shocker School (怪人昆虫博士とショッカースクール, Kaijin Konchū-hakase to Shokkā Sukūru) (Original Airdate: June 24, 1972)
Shocker Graveyard, Revived Monsters (ショッカー墓場よみがえる怪人たち, Shokkā Hakaba Yomigaeru Kaijin-tachi) (Original Airdate: July 1, 1972)
The Shocker Leader Appears! Riders in Danger (ショッカー首領出現！！ライダー危うし, Shokkā Shuryō Shutsugen!! Raidā Ayaushi) (Original Airdate: July 8, 1972)
Doctor Shinigami, the True Meaning of Terror? (死神博士恐怖の正体？, Shinigami Hakase Kyōfu no Shōtai?) (Original Airdate: July 15, 1972)
Monster Gillercricket's Claws of Impending Death (怪人ギラーコオロギせまる死のツメ, Kaijin Girākōrogi Semaru Shi no Tsume) (Original Airdate: July 28, 1972)
Monster Electric-Guitarbotal's Fireball Attack (怪人エレキボタル火の玉攻撃！！, Kaijin Erekibotaru Hi no Tama Kōgeki!!) (Original Airdate: July 29, 1972)
Monster Horseflygomes' Rokkoudai Mountain Pursuit (怪人アブゴメス六甲山大ついせき！, Kaijin Abugomesu Rokkōsan DaiTsuiseki!) (Original Airdate: August 5, 1972)
Vampiric Mosquilas vs. Two Riders (吸血モスキラス対二人ライダー, Kyūketsu Mosukirasu Tai Futari Raidā) (Original Airdate: August 12, 1972)
Double Riders' Defeat! Shiomaneking (ダブルライダー　倒せ！シオマネキング, Daburu Raidā Taose! Shiomanekingu) (Original Airdate: August 19, 1972)
Deadly Bloodsucking Fiends!! Good Luck, Rider Boys' Squad (死の吸血魔　がんばれ！！ライダー少年隊, Shi no Kyūketsu Ma Ganbare!! Raidā Shōnen Tai) (Original Airdate: August 26, 1972)
Poison Flower Monster Roseranga - The Secret of the House of Terror (毒花怪人バラランガ 恐怖の家の秘密, Doku Hana Kaijin Bararanga Kyōfu no Uchi no Himitsu) (Original Airdate: September 2, 1972)
Three Head of Generator Monster Seadragons!! (三匹の発電怪人シードラゴン！！, Sanbiki no Hatsuden Kaijin Shīdoragon!!) (Original Airdate: September 9, 1972)
Monster Newtgeth, Duel at the Farm of Hell!! (怪人イモリゲスじごく牧場の決闘！！, Kaijin Imorigesu Jigoku Bokujō no Kettō!!) (Original Airdate: September 16, 1972)
The Dreadful Urchindogma + The Phantom Monster (恐怖のウニドグマ＋ゆうれい怪人, Kyōfu no Unidoguma + Yūrei Kaijin) (Original Airdate: September 23, 1972)
Hell Ambassador!! The True Meaning of Fear? (地獄大使！！恐怖の正体？, Jigoku Taishi!! Kyōfu no Shōtai?) (Original Airdate: September 30, 1972)
Gel-Shocker Appears! Kamen Rider's Last Day! (ゲルショッカー出現！仮面ライダー最後の日!!, Gerushokkā Shutsugen! Kamen Raidā Saigo no Hi!!) (Original Airdate: October 7, 1972)
Kamen Rider Dies Twice! (仮面ライダーは二度死ぬ！, Kamen Raidā wa Nido Shinu!) (Original Airdate: October 14, 1972)
Monster Jellyfish Wolf, Dreadful Rush Hour (怪人クラゲウルフ　恐怖のラッシュアワー, Kaijin Kurage Urufu Kyōfu no Rasshuawā) (Original Airdate: October 21, 1972)
Monster Inokabuton, Defeat the Rider With Crazy Gas (怪人イノカブトン　発狂ガスでライダーを倒せ, Kaijin Inokabuton Hakkyō Gasu de Raidā o Taose) (Original Airdate: October 28, 1972)
Watch Out, Rider! Isoginjaguar's Hell Trap (危うしライダー！イソギンジャガーの地獄罠, Ayaushi Raidā! Isoginjagā no Jigoku Wana) (Original Airdate: November 4, 1972)
Sludge Monster, Dreadful Murder Smog (ヘドロ怪人恐怖の殺人スモッグ, Hedoro Kaijin Kyōfu no Satsujin Sumoggu) (Original Airdate: November 11, 1972)
Monster Eaglemantis' Human Hunt (怪人ワシカマギリの人間狩り, Kaijin Washikamagiri no Ningen Kari) (Original Airdate: November 18, 1972)
Gel-Shocker's Delivery Man of Death (ゲルショッカー　死の配達人, Gerushokkā Shi no Haitatsunin) (Original Airdate: November 25, 1972)
Bizarre! The Picture of the Black Cat That Calls for Blood (怪奇！血をよぶ黒猫の絵, Kaiki! Chi o Yobu Kuroneko no E) (Original Airdate: December 2, 1972)
Fear's Pet Strategy, Drop Rider into Hell! (恐怖のペット作戦　ライダーを地獄へ落とせ！, Kyōfu no Petto Sakusen Raidā o Jigoku e Otose!) (Original Airdate: December 9, 1972)
Fear's Pet Strategy, Rider SOS (恐怖のペット作戦　ライダーＳＯＳ, Kyōfu no Petto Sakusen Raidā Esu Ō Esu) (Original Airdate: December 16, 1972)
Gel-Shocker, Enroll in Terror School (ゲルショッカー恐怖学校に入学せよ, Gerushokkā Kyōfu Gakkō ni Nyūgaku Seyo) (Original Airdate: December 23, 1972)
Atrocity! Fake Kamen Rider!! (凶悪！にせ仮面ライダー！！, Kyōaku! Nise Kamen Raidā!!) (Original Airdate: December 30, 1972)
8 Kamen Riders (８人の仮面ライダー, Hachinin no Kamen Raidā) (Original Airdate: January 6, 1973)
The True Identity of the Gel-Shocker Leader (ゲルショッカー首領の正体, Gerushokkā Shuryō no Shōtai) (Original Airdate: January 13, 1973)
Monster Garaox's Sky-Flying Car (怪人ガラオックスの空飛ぶ自動車, Kaijin Garaokkusu no Sora Tobu Jidōsha) (Original Airdate: January 20, 1973)
Takeshi Hongo, Cactus Monster Exposed!? (本郷猛　サボテン怪人にされる！？, Hongō Takeshi Saboten Kaijin ni Sareru!?) (Original Airdate: January 27, 1973)
Takeshi Hongo, Transformation Impossible (本郷猛変身不可能, Hongō Takeshi Henshin Funō) (Original Airdate: February 3, 1973)
Gel-Shocker Annihilated! The End of the Leader!! (ゲルショッカー全滅！首領の最後！！, Gerushokkā Zenmetsu! Shuryō no Saigo!!) (Original Airdate: February 10, 1973)


== Films ==
1971: Go Go Kamen Rider (ゴーゴー仮面ライダー, Gō Gō Kamen Raidā) - A movie version of episode 13.
1972: Kamen Rider vs. Shocker (仮面ライダー対ショッカー, Kamen Raidā Tai Shokkā)
1972: Kamen Rider vs. Ambassador Hell (仮面ライダー対じごく大使, Kamen Raidā Tai Jigoku-taishi)
1975: Five Riders vs. King Dark (五人ライダー対キングダーク, Gonin Raidā Tai Kingu Dāku)
2005: Kamen Rider: The First
2007: Kamen Rider: The Next
2011: OOO, Den-O, All Riders: Let's Go Kamen Riders (オーズ・電王・オールライダー レッツゴー仮面ライダー, Ōzu Den'ō Ōru Raidā: Rettsu Gō Kamen Raidā)
2014: Heisei Rider vs. Shōwa Rider: Kamen Rider Taisen feat. Super Sentai (平成ライダー対昭和ライダー 仮面ライダー大戦 feat.スーパー戦隊, Heisei Raidā Tai Shōwa Raidā Kamen Raidā Taisen feat. Sūpā Sentai)
2016: Kamen Rider 1 (仮面ライダー1号, Kamen Raidā Ichigō)


== S.I.C. Hero Saga ==
Published in Monthly Hobby Japan, the S.I.C. Hero Saga stories illustrated by S.I.C. figure dioramas portray stories featuring the characters from the Shotaro Ishinomori series. Kamen Rider has had three different stories: Missing Link, Special Episode: Escape (SPECIAL EPISODE -脱出-, SPECIAL EPISODE: Dasshutsu), and From Here to Eternity (ここより永遠に, Koko yori Towa ni). Missing Link ran in the July to October 2002 issues, From Here to Eternity was featured in the special issue HOBBY JAPAN MOOK S.I.C. OFFICIAL DIORAMA STORY S.I.C. HERO SAGA vol.1 Kakioroshi, and Special Episode: Escape was featured in the October 2006 issue of Hobby Japan.
New characters introduced during the Missing Link story are the twelve Shocker Riders (ショッカーライダー, Shokkā Raidā, each with different colored scarves) and the Shocker Tank (ショッカータンク, Shokkā Tanku).

Missing Link chapter titlesInfiltration (潜入, Sennyū)
Disappearance (失踪, Shissō)
Awakening (覚醒, Kakusei)
Puppet (傀儡, Kairai)


== Cast ==
Hiroshi Fujioka as Takeshi Hongo (本郷 猛, Hongō Takeshi)
Takeshi Sasaki as Hayato Ichimonji (一文字 隼人, Ichimonji Hayato)
Akiji Kobayashi as Tōbei Tachibana (立花 藤兵衛, Tachibana Tōbei)
Jirō Chiba as Kazuya Taki (滝 和也, Taki Kazuya)
Jirō Miyaguchi as Colonel Zol (ゾル大佐, Zoru Taisa)
Hideyo Amamoto as Dr. Shinigami (死神博士, Shinigami Hakase)
Kenji Ushio as Ambassador Hell (地獄大使, Jigoku Taishi)
Matasaburō Niwa as General Black (ブラック将軍, Burakku Shōgun)
Chieko Morigawa (Played as Chieko Maki (真樹 千恵子, Maki Chieko)) as Ruriko Midorikawa (緑川 ルリ子, Midorikawa Ruriko)
Yōko Shimada as Hiromi Nohara (野原 ひろみ, Nohara Hiromi)
Linda Yamamoto as Mari (マリ, Mari)
Wakako Oki as Yuri (ユリ, Yuri)
Katsumi Nakajima as Michi (ミチ, Michi)
Emily Takami as Emi (エミ, Emi)
Yōko Sugibayashi as Mika (ミカ, Mika)
Machiko Nakajima (Played as Machiko Nakajima (中島 真智子, Nakajima Machiko)) as Tokko (トッコ, Tokko)
Yoshiko Nakada as Yokko (ヨッコ, Yokko)
Mimi Hagiwara (Played as Mimy (ミミー, Mimī)) as Choko (チョコ, Choko)
Yasuharu Miura as Goro Ishikura (石倉 五郎, Ishikura Gorō)
Tomonori Yazaki as Naoki (ナオキ, Naoki)
Hōichi Yamada as Mitsuru (ミツル, Mitsuru)
Jō Honda as Shirō (史郎, Shirō)
Gorō Naya as The Great Leader of The Great Leader of Shocker/Gel-Shocker (ショッカー/ゲルショッカー首領, Shokkā/Geru Shokkā Shuryō) (voice)
Shinji Nakae as Narrator


== Crew ==
Creator: Shotaro Ishinomori
Scriptwriters: Masaru Igami, Shin'ichi Ichikawa, Masayuki Shimada, Mari Takizawa, Hisashi Yamazaki, Takao Ikuo, Masashi Tsukada, Takeo Oono, Shiro Ishimori, Seirou Suzuki, Takayuki Hasegawa, Kimio Hirayama, Minoru Yamada, Gorou Okeya, Shotaro Ishinomori
Directors: Hirokazu Takemoto, Itaru Orita, Hidetoshi Kitamura, Minoru Yamada, Kazukuri Uchida, Katsuhiko Taguchi, Masashi Tsukada, Shotaro Ishinomori, Atsuo Kumanaka
Photographer: Osamigi Yamamoto
Illumination: Kouosamu Oota
Music: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Mokuo Mikami
Editing: Ayaki Sugeno (Eiko-Onkyo Ltd.)
Recording: Mari Fujinami
Assistant Director: Masashi Tsukada
Costume Designer: Tokyo Designs
Action Choreographer: Kazutoshi Takahashi
Line Chief: Teruo Itou
Production Manager: Okusouhei Matono
Sound Recording: Katsushi Ota (Eiko-Onkyo Ltd.)
Development: Toei Laboratories
Cooperation: Muromachi Racing Group


== Songs ==
Opening themes"Let's Go!! Rider Kick" (レッツゴー!!ライダーキック, Rettsu Gō!! Raidā Kikku)
Lyrics: Shōtarō Ishinomori
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Hiroshi Fujioka/Masato Shimon (as Kōichi Fuji) with Male Harmony (メール・ハーモニー, Mēru Hāmonī)
Episodes: 1 - 13 (Fujioka), 14 - 88 (Fuji)
"Rider Action" (ライダーアクション, Raidā Akushon)
Lyrics: Shōtarō Ishinomori
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Masato Shimon
Episodes: 89 – 98Ending themes"Kamen Rider no Uta" (仮面ライダーの歌, Kamen Raidā no Uta, "The Song of Kamen Rider")
Lyrics: Saburō Yatsude
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Masato Shimon (as Kōichi Fuji) with Male Harmony
Episodes: 1 – 71
"Rider Action" (ライダーアクション, Raidā Akushon)
Lyrics: Shōtarō Ishinomori
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Masato Shimon
Episodes: 72 – 88
"Lonely Kamen Rider" (ロンリー仮面ライダー, Ronrī Kamen Raidā)
Lyrics: Mamoru Tanaka
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Masato Shimon
Episodes: 89 – 98


== Legacy ==
The Kamen Rider original series famously spearheaded launched the "Second Kaiju Boom" or "Henshin Boom" on Japanese television in the early 1970s, greatly impacting the superhero and action-adventure genre in Japan. The famous "henshin sequence", in which the title hero performs ritualistic poses and shouting a keyword to transform into his superhero form has since become a staple in Japanese pop-culture, inspiring superheroes and magical girl genres. Kamen Rider went to later produce a great number of spin-offs which remain in production today. Several Kamen Rider series were aired in Japan after the first Kamen Rider finished. After Kamen Rider Black RX ended production in 1989, the series was put on hold.
There were three movies released as the 1990s "Movie Riders", which were Shin Kamen Rider: Prologue, Kamen Rider ZO and Kamen Rider J. After the original creator Shōtarō Ishinomori's death, the Kamen Rider franchise had continued in 2000 with Kamen Rider Kuuga. As of 2018, twenty-nine Kamen Rider series have been made, with the then-newest being Kamen Rider Zi-O which premiered in September 2018.
As of 2005, a remake of the Kamen Rider series was made and reimagined with Kamen Rider The First and continued with Kamen Rider The Next released in 2007.
The cultural impact of the series in Japan resulted in astronomer Akimasa Nakamura naming two minor planets in honor of the series: 12408 Fujioka, after actor Hiroshi Fujioka, known for his portrayal of Takeshi Hongo/Kamen Rider 1, and 12796 Kamenrider, after the series itself.


== References ==


== External links ==
Ishimori@Style - Shotaro Ishinomori on Ishimori Productions official website
Kamen Rider series on Region 2 DVD - A complete list of all official releases to date.
Toei Kyoto Studio Park - A theme park with official events, exhibitions and shops related to the Kamen Rider.
Kamen Rider at Curlie