Kamen Rider (1979 TV series)

Kamen Rider (仮面ライダー, Kamen Raidā, Masked Rider in English) is a Japanese tokusatsu television series. It is the sixth program in the Kamen Rider Series. It has the same name as the first series in the franchise, and fans usually refer to this series as The New Kamen Rider (新しい仮面ライダー, Atarashii Kamen Raidā) or Skyrider (スカイライダー, Sukairaidā) (after the main character) in order to distinguish it from the original. The series was broadcast on MBS from October 5, 1979 to October 10, 1980. The series was a co-production between Toei and Ishinomori Productions, and was created by Shotaro Ishinomori. It aired every Saturday at 7:00 PM.
The New Kamen Rider was intended as a revival of the original Kamen Rider, going back to the basic, essential themes established in that series, as opposed to the more complex and unique series that came before it, such as Kamen Rider Amazon and Kamen Rider Stronger.


== Story ==
Doctor Keitarō Shido, an acclaimed scientist, has been kidnapped by the terrorist organization Neo-Shocker in order to exploit his expertise in robotics technology. Desperate to escape, he convinces Neo-Shocker command to allow him to operate on an injured camper. Explaining that he can turn the camper, Hiroshi Tsukuba into a powerful Neo-Shocker warrior, they allow Doctor Shido to operate. However, he quickly turns the tables on them, transforming Hiroshi not into an kaijin, but into the powerful warrior Skyrider, using his newfound abilities to combat the evil Neo-Shocker menace.


== Characters ==
Hiroshi Tsukuba/Skyrider (筑波　洋／スカイライダー, Tsukuba Hiroshi/Sukairaidā): A gliding enthusiast caught in a conflict with Neo-Shocker after one of their agents murdered his friends. He ended up being caught and turned into a cyborg by both Ketaro and Neo-Shocker after he was mortally injured in an attempt to save Keitaro from Neo-Shocker, before he and the scientist managed to escape from their captors and use his newfound powers to fight the terrorist group.
Keitarō Shido (志度 敬太郎, Shido Keitarō, 1-13): A scientist targeted by Neo-Shocker who was responsible for Tsukuba becoming Skyrider. To keep a low profile, having hang glided in his youth, Shido founded the Shido Hang Glide Club and last aided Skyrider in disarming a Plus-Alpha Bomb before leaving the country to join the Anti-Neo-Shocker Committee.
Midori Kanō (叶 みどり, Kanō Midori): Shido's aide.
Yumi Nozaki (野崎 ユミ, Nozaki Yumi):  A member of the Shido Hang Glide Club.
Michi Sugimura (杉村 ミチ, Sugimura Michi): A member of the Shido Hang Glide Club.
Imata Tonda (飛田 今太, Tonda Imata): A photojournalist who is looking for a good story, usually losing consciousness when he is about to stumble into a fight between Skyrider and Neo-Shocker.
Genjirō Tani (谷 源次郎, Tani Genjirō, 14-54): A senior of Tsukuba's and a friend of Shido, Tani owns the Blanca Coffee Shop that serves as Skyrider's new base of operations. Having lost his family to Neo-Shocker in the past, Tani is eager to help Tsukuba take the organization down.
Numa (沼, Numa)
Aki Ozawa (小沢 アキ, Ozawa Aki)
Naoko Itō (伊東 ナオコ, Itō Naoko)
Kanji Yada/GanGan G (矢田 勘次／がんがんじい, Yada Kanji/Gan Gan Jī)


=== Neo-Shocker ===
Shocker is once again reformed as the Neo-Shocker (ネオショッカー, Neo Shokkā) organization, playing a role in numerous disappearances and terrorist attacks against the Japanese government. Spreading their influence across the world, their goal is the genocide of about two thirds of the current human population on Earth with them as the dominant majority. Though the other branches are succeeding unopposed, only the Japanese branch is making no progress due to the interference of Skyrider.

Neo-Shocker's Great Leader (ネオショッカー大首領, Neo Shokkā Dai Shuryō, 52-54): A giant dragon who is the leader of the Neo-Shocker organization. Destroyed in a bomb explosion by the combined efforts of all previous Kamen Riders.
General Monster/Yamorijin (ゼネラルモンスター／ヤモリジン, Zeneraru Monsutā/Yamorijin, 1-17): The first chief of Neo-Shocker's Japanese branch, armed with a cane. Eventually promoted, Monster underwent a modification into Yamorijin, a gecko cyborg. Due to a recent failure he was presented with the red eye, which signals that if he fails for a final time he will be terminated. He was executed by Admiral Majin after he was defeated by Skyrider's Sky Kick. He is revived by the Badan Empire in Kamen Rider Spirits vol. 8, kidnapping people in Sapporo. He was eventually destroyed by Kamen Rider ZX's Rider Spin Shot and crashed into Admiral Majin.
Admiral Majin (魔人提督, Majin Teitoku, 17-53): The second and final chief of the Neo-Shocker organization. He was the only Neo-Shocker member with no kaijin form. He was executed by the Great Leader after being defeated by Kamen Rider #2, Kamen Rider Stronger and Skyrider's triple kick. He is revived by the Badan Empire in Kamen Rider Spirits vol. 8, confronting Skyrider in Mashu Lake, but is eventually destroyed by Skyrider's Dragonfly Chute and crashed into Yamorijin.
Gingaoh (銀河王, Ginga Ō, lit. "Galaxy King"): Gingaoh is the main antagonist in the Skyrider movie, a mechanical alien invader that Neo-Shocker formed an alliance with. He was destroyed in his spaceship explosion.
Ari Commandos (アリコマンド, Ari Komando): Antlike footsoldiers in black.
Skull Assassination Squad (ドクロ暗殺隊, Dokuro Ansatsu Tai, 53 & 54): Skull-masked elite guards who wield swords and crossbows.
Neo-Shocker Scientists:
Professor Doc (プロフェッサー・ドク, Puroffesā Doku, 16-18): A friend of General Monster. After General Monster died, he was sentenced to death by Admiral Majin and killed by Shibirayjin.
Doctor Meteor (ドクター・メテオ, Dokutā Meteo, 38): An authority on brain surgery. Killed by Kamen Rider Stronger's Electro Shock.
Doctor X (ドクターX, Dokutā Ekkusu, 52): He repairs or scraps Ari Commands in a dock disguised as a pediatric clinic.
Shiroari Commandos (白アリコマンド, Shiroari Komando): Termitelike scientists who assist in the conversion of humans into cyborgs.


== Episodes ==
A Cyborg Flies in the Sky (改造人間大空を翔ぶ, Kaizō Ningen Ōzora o Tobu) (Original Airdate: October 5, 1979)
Bizarre! Kumojin (怪奇！クモンジン, Kaiki! Kumonjin) (Original Airdate: October 12, 1979)
It's Courage! The Fear of the Bat Flute (勇気だ！コウモリ笛の恐怖, Yūki da! Kōmori-bue no Kyōfu) (Original Airdate: October 19, 1979)
Two Cyborgs, the Angry Rider Break (２つの改造人間 怒りのライダーブレイク, Futatsu no Kaizō Ningen Ikari no Raidā Bureiku) (Original Airdate: October 26, 1979)
Fly, Ride on a Girl's Dreams (翔べ 少女の夢をのせて, Tobe Shōjo no Yume o Nosete) (Original Airdate: November 2, 1979)
Kinokojin! The Devil's Hands are Cold (キノコジン！悪魔の手は冷たい, Kinokojin! Akuma no Te wa Tsumetai) (Original Airdate: November 9, 1979)
Kamagirijin! The Dreadful Ceremony (カマギリジン！恐怖の儀式, Kamagirijin! Kyōfu no Gishiki) (Original Airdate: November 16, 1979)
Mukadenjin's Trap! The Mysterious Operating Room (ムカデンジンの罠！謎の手術室, Mukadenjin no Wana! Nazo no Shujutsushitsu) (Original Airdate: November 23, 1979)
Cobranjin's Murder Army (コブランジンの殺人軍団, Koburanjin no Satsujin Gundan) (Original Airdate: November 30, 1979)
Seen! Kaningerjin's Secret (見た！カニンガージンの秘密, Mita! Kaningājin no Himitsu) (Original Airdate: December 7, 1979)
Sanshojin! Escape from Hell Valley (サンショウジン！地獄谷の脱出, Sanshōjin! Jigokudani no Dasshutsu) (Original Airdate: December 14, 1979)
Dark Santa Claus; Ah, Transformation Impossible (暗闇のサンタクロースああ変身不可能, Kurayami no Santa Kurōsu Aa Henshin Fukanō) (Original Airdate: December 21, 1979)
Arijigokujin, Tokyo Explodes Before 3:00 (アリジゴクジン東京爆発３時間前, Arijigokujin Tōkyō Bakuhatsu Sanjikan-mae) (Original Airdate: December 28, 1979)
Haejigokujin, Kamen Rider Close Call (ハエジゴクジン仮面ライダー危機一髪, Haejigokujin Kamen Raidā Kikiippatsu) (Original Airdate: January 4, 1980)
Dreadful Aokabijin's Big Tokyo Earthquake (恐怖のアオカビジンの東京大地震, Kyōfu no Aokabijin no Tōkyō Dai Jishin) (Original Airdate: January 11, 1980)
The Immortal Gokiburijin, What is the True Identity of General Monster? (不死身のゴキブリジンＧ(ゼネラル)モンスターの正体は？, Fujimi no Gokiburijin Zeneraru Monsutā no Shōtai wa?) (Original Airdate: January 18, 1980)
You Did It! The End of General Monster (やったぞ！Ｇ(ゼネラル)モンスターの最後, Yatta zo! Zeneraru Monsutā no Saigo) (Original Airdate: January 25, 1980)
Admiral Majin's Great Electric Hell Operation (魔神提督の電気ジゴク大作戦, Majin Teitoku no Denki Jigoku Dai Sakusen) (Original Airdate: February 1, 1980)
Cover Your Ears Too! Okamijin's Murderous Cry (君も耳をふさげ！オオカミジン殺しの叫び, Kimi mo Mimi o Fusage! Ōkamijin Koroshi no Sakebi) (Original Airdate: February 8, 1980)
Two Kamen Riders, Who is Another? (２人の仮面ライダーもう１人はだれだ？, Futari no Kamen Raidā Mō Hitori wa Dare da?) (Original Airdate: February 15, 1980)
Enter Stronger; Two Riders vs. Two Formidable Monsters (ストロンガー登場２人ライダー対強敵２怪人, Sutorongā Tōjō Futari Raidā Tai Kyōteki Ni Kaijin) (Original Airdate: February 22, 1980)
Kogoensky Froze Tokyo 5 Seconds Ago (コゴエンスキー東京冷凍５秒前, Kogoensukī Tōkyō Reitō Gobyō-mae) (Original Airdate: February 29, 1980)
Monster Flying Squirrel Brothers and Two Riders (怪人ムササビ兄弟と２人のライダー, Kaijin Musasabi Kyōdai to Futari no Raidā) (Original Airdate: March 7, 1980)
Madarakajin, Fear of Poison Gas (マダラカジン毒ガスの恐怖, Madarakajin Dokugasu no Kyōfu) (Original Airdate: March 14, 1980)
Heavy! Heavy! The 50-ton Baby (重いぞ！重いぞ！５０トンの赤ちゃん, Omoi zo! Omoi zo! Gojutton no Akachan) (Original Airdate: March 21, 1980)
Three Riders vs. Neoshocker's School Fortress (３人ライダー対ネオショッカーの学校要塞, San'nin Raidā Tai Neo Shokkā no Gakkō Yōsai) (Original Airdate: March 28, 1980)
Tank and Kaijin the Second Generation Corps, Full Force of Eight Riders (戦車と怪人Ⅱ世部隊 ８人ライダー勢ぞろい, Sensha to Kaijin Nisei Butai Hachi'nin Raidā Seizoroi) (Original Airdate: April 4, 1980)
Eight Riders' Great Training of Friendship (８人ライダー友情の大特訓, Hachi'nin Raidā Yūjō no Dai Tokkun) (Original Airdate: April 11, 1980)
First Appearance! Powered Skyrider's Finishing Move (初公開！強化スカイライダーの必殺技, Hatsu Kōkai! Kyōka Sukairaidā no Hissatsu-waza) (Original Airdate: April 18, 1980)
He Eats Dreams? The Strange Boy Who Came From the Amazon (夢を食べる？アマゾンから来た不思議な少年, Yume o Taberu? Amazon kara Kita Fushigi na Shōnen) (Original Airdate: April 25, 1980)
Run, X-Rider! Hiroshi Tsukuba! Don't Die!! (走れＸライダー！筑波洋よ死ぬな！！, Hashire Ekkusu Raidā! Tsukuba Hiroshi yo Shinu na!!) (Original Airdate: May 2, 1980)
Thank You, Keisuke Jin! Leave the Final Blow to Me!! (ありがとう神敬介！とどめは俺にまかせろ！！, Arigatō Jin Keisuke! Todome wa Ore ni Makasero!!) (Original Airdate: May 9, 1980)
Hello! Riderman, be Careful of Nezura Man (ハロー! ライダーマンネズラ毒に気をつけろ!!, Harō! Raidāman Nezura Doku ni Ki o Tsukero!!) (Original Airdate: May 16, 1980)
Danger, Skyrider! He's Come! Shirō Kazami!! (危うしスカイライダー！やって来たぞ風見志郎！！, Ayaushi Sukairaidā! Yattekita zo Kazami Shirō!!) (Original Airdate: May 23, 1980)
Kazami Senpai! I'll Get the Tako Gang!! (風見先輩！タコギャングはオレがやる！！, Kazami-senpai! Tako Gyangu wa Ore ga Yaru!!) (Original Airdate: May 30, 1980)
Hurry, Hayato Ichimonji! Save the People Caught in Trees!! (急げ、一文字隼人！樹にされる人々を救え！！, Isoge, Ichimonji Hayato! Ki ni Sareru Hitobito o Sukue!!) (Original Airdate: June 6, 1980)
The Mystery of Hyakki Village! Is Hiroshi also Caught in a Tree? (百鬼村の怪！洋も樹にされるのか？, Hyakki-mura no Kai! Hiroshi mo Ki ni Sareru no ka?) (Original Airdate: June 13, 1980)
Please, Shigeru Jō! There's the Ari Commando Training School With a Million Yen Monthly Salary (来たれ、城茂！月給百万円のアリコマンド養成所, Kitare, Jō Shigeru! Gekkyū Hyakuman'en no Ari Komando Yōseijo) (Original Airdate: June 20, 1980)
Help! Two Riders!! Mother Becomes a Demon (助けて！２人のライダー！！母ちゃんが鬼になる, Tasukete! Futari no Raidā!! Kāchan ga Oni ni Naru) (Original Airdate: June 27, 1980)
Chase, Hayato! The Kappa's Bowl Flies Through the Sky (追え隼人！カッパの皿が空をとぶ, Oe Hayato! Kappa no Sara ga Sora o Tobu) (Original Airdate: July 4, 1980)
Ghost Story Series - The Secret of the Phantom Building (怪談シリーズ・幽霊ビルのひみつ, Kaidan Shirīzu - Yūrei Biru no Himitsu) (Original Airdate: July 11, 1980)
Ghost Story Series - Zombie! The Monster is Revived (怪談シリーズ・ゾンビー！お化けが生きかえる, Kaidan Shirīzu - Zonbī! Obake ga Ikikaeru) (Original Airdate: July 18, 1980)
Ghost Story Series - Hōichi the Earless' 999 Ears (怪談シリーズ・耳なし芳一９９９の耳, Kaidan Shirīzu - Miminashi Hōichi Kyūhyakukyūjūkyū no Mimi) (Original Airdate: July 25, 1980)
Ghost Story Series - The Werecat Wants Children's Blood! (怪談シリーズ・呪いの化け猫 子供の血が欲しい！, Kaidan Shirīzu - Noroi no Bakeneko Kodomo no Chi ga Hoshii!) (Original Airdate: August 1, 1980)
Ghost Story Series - The Snake Woman Curses Hiroshi Tsukuba! (怪談シリーズ・蛇女が筑波洋を呪う！, Kaidan Shirīzu - Hebi On'na ga Tsukuba Hiroshi o Norou!) (Original Airdate: August 8, 1980)
Ghost Story Series - The Breakable Human! Fear of the Mirror's Center (怪談シリーズ・くだける人間！鏡の中の恐怖, Kaidan Shirīzu - Kudakeru Ningen! Kagami no Naka no Kyōfu) (Original Airdate: August 15, 1980)
Skyrider's Greatest Weakness! Attack the 0.5 Second Blind Spot (スカイライダー最大の弱点！０．５秒の死角をつけ, Sukairaidā Saidai no Jakuten! Rētengobyō no Shikaku o Tsuke) (Original Airdate: August 22, 1980)
Four Skyriders, Who is the Real One? (４人のスカイライダー本物はだれだ？, Yo'nin no Sukairaidā Honmono wa Dare da?) (Original Airdate: August 29, 1980)
Rocket Launch! Hiroshi Tsukuba Goes to the Space Graveyard (ロケット発射！筑波洋を宇宙の墓場へ, Roketto Hassha! Tsukuba Hiroshi o Uchū no Hakaba e) (Original Airdate: September 5, 1980)
You, Also Enlist in the Ari Commando Boys' Squad!? (君もアリコマンド少年隊に入隊せよ！？, Kimi mo Ari Komando Shōnen-tai ni Nyūtai seyo!?) (Original Airdate: September 12, 1980)
Neoshocker Red & White, Great Decisive Battle of Death (ネオショッカー紅白死の大決戦, Neo Shokkā Kōhaku Shi no Dai Kessen) (Original Airdate: September 19, 1980)
Hiroshi's Father Had Lived! As Altered Human FX777? (洋の父が生きていた！改造人間ＦＸ７７７とは？, Hiroshi no Chichi ga Ikite Ita! Kaizō Ningen Efu Ekkusu Surī Sebun to wa?) (Original Airdate: September 26, 1980)
The End of Admiral Majin! And the Great Leader's True Identity? (魔神提督の最後！そして大首領の正体は？, Majin Teitoku no Saigo! Soshite Dai Shuryō no Shōtai wa?) (Original Airdate: October 3, 1980)
Farewell, Hiroshi Tsukuba! Eight Heroes Forever.... (さらば筑波洋！８人の勇士よ永遠に・・・・, Saraba Tsukuba Hiroshi! Hachi'nin no Yūshi yo Eien ni....) (Original Airdate: October 10, 1980)


== Special ==
Immortal Kamen Rider Special aired on September 8, 1979. Tobei Tachibana visits a Kamen Rider museum where he talks to some children about the Kamen Riders. Scenes from Kamen Rider, X, Amazon and Stronger are shown. He's about to introduce a new Kamen Rider when some of the kids remind him that he forgot Kamen Rider V3. Clips from the movie Kamen Rider V3 vs. Destron Mutants are shown. After the movie clips, Tobei Tachibana introduces Skyrider, with previews of New Kamen Rider.


== Movie ==
The Movie Eight Riders vs. Gingaoh (仮面ライダー 8人ライダーVS銀河王 Kamen Raidā: Hachi'nin Raidā Tai Gingaō) was released on March 15, 1980 and features Skyrider teaming up with the previous 7 riders.


== Cast ==
Hiroaki Murakami as Hiroshi Tsukuba
Kimiko Tanaka as Midori Kanō
Naoko Fushimi as Michi Sugimura
Kaori Tatsumi as Yumi Nozaki
Ryūmei Azuma as Imata Tonda
Mie Suzuki as Naoko Itō
Sayako Eguchi as Aki Ozawa
Jin Takase as Numa
Kōji Shiratori as Shigeru Kanō
Tomaru Katsura as Kanji Yada
Gorō Naya as The Great Leader
Shinzō Hotta as General Monster
Yōsuke Naka as Admiral Majin
Takashi Tabata as Keitarō Shido
Nobuo Tsukamoto as Genjirō Tani
Shinji Nakae as Narrator


== Songs ==
Opening themes"Moero! Kamen Rider" (燃えろ! 仮面ライダー, Moero! Kamen Raidā, "Burn! Kamen Rider")
Lyrics: Shotaro Ishinomori
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Ichirou Mizuki and Kōrogi '73
Episodes: 1-28
"Otoko no Na wa Kamen Rider" (男の名は仮面ライダー, Otoko no Na wa Kamen Raidā, "That Man's Name is Kamen Rider")
Lyrics: Shotaro Ishinomori
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Ichirou Mizuki
Episodes: 29-54Ending themes"Haruka naru Ai ni Kakete" (はるかなる愛にかけて, "Long Distance Love")
Lyrics: Saburō Yatsude
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Ichirou Mizuki and Kōrogi '73
Episodes: 1-28
"Kagayake! Hachinin Rider" (輝け! 8人ライダー, Kagayake! Hachinin Raidā, "Shine! Eight Riders")
Lyrics: Saburō Yatsude
Composition & Arrangement: Shunsuke Kikuchi
Artist: Ichirou Mizuki and The Chirps
Episodes: 29-54


== See also ==