Duved (ski area)

Åre (pronounced like 'Aura') is a ski resort in Jämtland, Sweden, founded 110 years ago in 1909 and owned by SkiStar AB.
Åre, short for Årefjällen (Åre Mountains), is located in Åre Municipality, just outside and above the village of Åre, approximately 80 km (50 mi.) from the city of Östersund. The ski lift system is on the Åreskutan mountain, at an elevation of 1,420 m (4,660 ft); its absolute summit is not lift-served, but is reachable by snowmobile. The village and ski area are accessible by bus and train. The nearest airport is Åre Östersund Airport. With a latitude of 63.4° north, the ski area is approximately 350 km (220 mi) south of the Arctic Circle.


== History ==
1882 – The railway to Åre is finished and officially opened by King Oscar II.
1891 – Åre tourist information centre opens. ”Tourists and spa guests visiting the climatic spa Åre” is the theme of the first advertising campaign.
1892 – The café on the top of Åreskutan opens; it remains the highest café in Sweden.
1910 – Åre Bergbana opens, the first fixed link in Åre, beginning the area's development as a winter sports resort. Tobogganing, curling and skiing are offered.
1935 – The local slalom racing club, the Åre Slalomklubb, is formed. Over the years, the club's members have included such names as Lars-Börje Eriksson (Olympic bronze medalist in super G, 1988), Patrik Järbyn (World Championships silver medalist in Super G, 1996,) and Richard Richardsson (Olympic silver medalist in snowboard parallel giant slalom, 2002).
1940 – The first drag lift is opened in Åre, located near the Olympia area and Lundsgården. The tiny yellow lift cabin is still in place.
1952 – The Fjällgården ski area is opened. The lift passengers were transported standing up in tall buckets, one of which is displayed in front of the funicular station on Åre square.
1954 – Åre hosts the World Championships, making Åre known throughout the skiing world.
1966 – Duveds Linbana, the first chairlift in Duved, is opened, followed by other investments in the Duved ski area.
1976 – The Kabinbanan cable car, servicing the upper part of the ski area, is opened at a cost of 73 million Swedish kronor. At this time, the formidable success of Swedish ski racer Ingemar Stenmark gives a great boost to the Swedish alpine ski industry.
1981 – The first lift is built at Åre Björnen, followed by other investments in the area. The first snow cannons are installed at Åre.
1989 – The Olympia gondola is opened by King Carl XVI Gustav and Queen Silvia.
2001 – In the central part of the Åre ski area, two new lifts are built and three new slopes are opened — the single largest investment since the building of the cable car.
2006 – The Olympia chairlift is replaced by the world's first telemix lift, a lift with chairs and gondolas.
2007 – Åre hosts the World Championships for a second time.
2009 – Åre is named winner of "World's top ski resorts" by the British travel magazine Condé Nast Traveller
2013 – Sadelexpressen, Fjällgårdsexpressen and Tegeliften opened.
2016 – Åre hosts Freestyle Junior World Championships in Moguls, and again 2018, this time in Duved.
2017 – Åre hosts the Junior World Championships.
2019 – Åre hosts the World Championships, its third.
2021 – Åre along with Östersund will host the 2021 Special Olympics World Winter Games.
2026 – it will host alpine skiing, snowboarding and freestyle skiing should Stockholm and Åre host the 2026 Winter Olympics and 2026 Winter Paralympics.


== Night skiing ==

There is night skiing every evening until week 10. The night skiing is between 6 pm and 8 pm.
Central Åre:
The lift "VM8:an" with the two slopes "Gästrappet" and "Lundsrappet" in the world championship area (Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays).
Duved:
The lift "Hamreliften" and the slopes "Skistarbacken" and "Hamrebacken". (Tuesdays and Thursdays)
Åre Björnen:
The lifts "Björnliften", "Nalleliften" and "Vargliften" with connecting slopes. (Thursdays and Sundays)


== Areas ==


=== Central Åre ===

In Central Åre there are plenty of runs to choose from, both for beginners and advanced skiers. Central Åre is the largest area in the Åre Ski Area. Advanced skiers often prefer the central area with the longest runs which are also fairly steep.

Lifts in Central Åre
Bergbanan
Tottliften
Fjällgårdsexpressen
Hummelliften
Kabinbanan
Gondolen
VM6:an
VM8:an
Worldcupliften
Bräckeliften
Lillröda
Lillvita
Rödhakeliften
Rödkulleliften 1
Rödkulleliften 2
Nedre Tväråvalvsliften
Nedre Tväråvalvsliften 2
Stendalsliften
Ullådalsliften
Ullådalsliften 2
Övre Tväråvalvsliften


=== ÅreBjörnen ===

Åre Björnen is the ski area for the youngest skiers and families. ÅreBjörnen is connected to Central Åre with lifts.

Lifts in ÅreBjörnen
Björnliften
Järvenliften
Mårdenliften
Högåsliften
Lokattliften
Nalleliften
Renenliften
Sadellexpressen
Vargliften
Copperhill liften


=== Tegefjäll ===
Tegefjäll is also suitable for families with small children, the system is connected to the Duved lift system. 

Lifts in Tegefjäll
Englandsliften
Fjällvallsliften
Mini Tege
Tegesliften
Gunnilliften – at 1.6 kilometers long, this is the longest T-bar lift in the world.


=== Duved ===

Duved is a bit bigger than Tegefjäll and offers slopes both for the beginner and the expert. Duved is connected to the Tegefjäll system.

Lifts in Duved
Byliften
Torpliften
Duveds Linbana
Hamreliften
Leråliften


== References ==


== External links ==
www.visitare.com/en – Official visitor guide
[1] – Ski area (Swedish webb)
www.are-sweden.com – Information on Åre Ski resort
Piste Maps – Åre ski resort