FIFA Club World Cup Fair Play Trophy

The FIFA Club World Cup is an international association football competition organised by the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), the sport's global governing body. The championship was first contested as the FIFA Club World Championship in 2000. It was not held between 2001 and 2004 due to a combination of factors, most importantly the collapse of FIFA's marketing partner International Sport and Leisure. Following a change in format which saw the FIFA Club World Championship absorb the Intercontinental Cup, it was relaunched in 2005 and took its current name the season afterwards.The current format of the tournament involves seven teams competing for the title at venues within the host nation over a period of about two weeks; the winners of that year's edition of the Asian AFC Champions League, African CAF Champions League, North American CONCACAF Champions League, South American Copa Libertadores, Oceanian OFC Champions League and European UEFA Champions League, along with the host nation's national champion, participate in a straight knock – out tournament.At the end of each FIFA World Cup final tournament, several awards are attributed to the players and teams which have distinguished themselves from the rest in different aspects of the game. Spanish club Barcelona has been the only club to earn every award in one edition, a feat accomplished during the 2015 FIFA Club World Cup. Barcelona, along with Real Madrid, are also the only sides to have earned three FIFA Fair Play Trophies. Lionel Messi is also the only player to have won two Golden Balls and two MVP Final awards. Uruguayan player Luis Suárez holds the record for the most goals scored in one edition (five in 2015).


== Awards ==
There are currently four awards:
the Golden Ball for best player;
the FIFA Fair Play Trophy for the team with the best record of fair play
the MVP of the Final Match Trophy for the best player in the final; first awarded in 2005.The winners of the competition also receive the FIFA Club World Cup Champions Badge; it features an image of the trophy, which the reigning champion is entitled to display on its kit until the final of the next championship. The badge was first presented to Milan, the winners of the 2007 final. Initially, all four previous champions were allowed to wear the badge until the 2008 final, where Manchester United gained the sole right to wear the badge by winning the trophy.Each player from the clubs finishing third, second and first will also receive one bronze, silver and gold medal each, respectively.


== Golden Ball ==

The Golden Ball award is presented to the best player at each FIFA Club World Cup, with a shortlist drawn up by the FIFA technical committee and the winner voted for by representatives of the media. Those who finish as runners-up in the vote receive the Silver Ball and Bronze Ball awards as the second and third most outstanding players in the tournament respectively.
Barcelona (Deco – 2006, Lionel Messi – 2009 and 2011, Luis Suárez – 2015) and Real Madrid (Sergio Ramos – 2014, Cristiano Ronaldo – 2016, Luka Modrić – 2017, Gareth Bale – 2018) are the only clubs to have earned the Golden Ball award four times.
Barcelona is also the only club to have earned every award in one edition (2015 Japan).
Lionel Messi is the only player to have won two Golden Balls.
Cristiano Ronaldo has won most awards (4), one Golden Ball and three Silver Balls.
Brazilian players have won the most Golden Balls amassing four. They also hold the record for the most Silver Balls with four.
Brazilian players share the record with Argentine players for the most Bronze Balls with three each.
Cristian Bolaños, Dioko Kaluyituka, Mouhcine Iajour, Gaku Shibasaki and Ivan Vicelich are the only non-European and non-South American players who have earned the Silver Ball or the Bronze Ball while playing for a club that doesn't come from the aforementioned continents.


== Most Valuable Player of the Final Match Trophy ==
The Most Valuable Player of the Final Match Trophy award was awarded for the first time at the 2005 FIFA Club World Cup in Japan and won by Brazil's Rogério Ceni. The award is given to the best player in the final via the FIFA Technical Study Group. The winner also is rewarded with a Toyota-made automobile.
Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo are the only players to have been named the best player of the final on two occasions.
Brazilian and Portuguese players have earned that distinction the most times with three nominations each.
Deco is the only player to have won the award for the losing side.


== FIFA Fair Play Trophy ==
The FIFA Fair Play Trophy is given to the team with the best record of fair play during the Club World Cup tournament. The winners of this award earn the FIFA Fair Play Trophy, a diploma, a fair play medal for each player and official, and $50,000 worth of football equipment to be used for youth development.Barcelona and Real Madrid are the only clubs to have won three FIFA Fair Play Trophies.


== Hat-tricks ==
Luis Suárez, Cristiano Ronaldo, and Gareth Bale are the only players who have scored a hat-trick. Suárez did so in the 2015 semi-final against Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao where he scored all three goals of that match. Cristiano Ronaldo scored a hat-trick in 2016 FIFA Club World Cup Final against Kashima Antlers, an equalizing penalty kick followed by two extra-time goals. Gareth Bale scored a hat-trick in the 2018 semi-final against Kashima Antlers, where he scored all three of his team's goals before being substituted in less than an hour.


== References ==


== External links ==
FIFA's official site for the FIFA Club World Cup (in English)(in French)(in German)(in Portuguese)(in Spanish)
Toyota's official site for the FIFA Club World Cup (in English)(in Japanese)