Vivian Reed (musical theatre actress)

Vivian Reed is an African-American actress and singer. She is most known for her performances in the Broadway productions of Bubbling Brown Sugar for which she won a Drama Desk Award and received her first Tony Award nomination and for The High Rollers Social and Pleasure Club for which she received her second Tony Award nomination. Reed has also recorded several albums on the Epic Records and the United Artists Records labels


== Biography and career ==
Vivian Reed is a multi-award winner with two Tony Award nominations, Drama Desk Award, Theatre world Award, Outer Critics Circle Award, Dance Education of America Award, NAACP Award and several others. Vivian began formal voice training at the age of eight at the Pittsburgh Musical Institute, later continuing at New York's Juilliard School of Music followed by years of extensive dance training. She became a polished performer under the guidance of Honi Coles and Bobby Schiffman of the Apollo Theater. In 1968, Vivian had regionally popularized a Gerri Goffin and Carol King composed tune called "Yours Until Tomorrow", which achieved major success in the New York City Metropolitan area. Vivian received critical acclaim for her work in Bubbling Brown Sugar on Broadway and Europe. She captured the attention of Pierre Cardin who booked her into his theater and held her over for several weeks.  Through Cardin she went to Japan for the first time and later made her first European TV special. Later she was invited by the Prince and Princess of Monaco to perform in Monte Carlo.
Vivian has appeared on many TV variety and talk shows both nationally and internationally including The Tonight Show, The Today Show and the ABC-TV daytime drama, One Life to Live. She has shared the bill with notable performers as Bill Cosby, Patti Labelle, Brian Stokes Mitchell, Audra McDonald, Elaine Stritch, Alan King, Sammy Davis Jr., Quincy Jones, Ashford and Simpson and Charles Aznavour just to name a few. Her film credits include Headin' for Broadway, 'L'Africaine' with Catherine Deneuve and 'Le Rumba,' in which she portrayed Josephine Baker. Recently she produced and starred in a short film 'What Goes Around' written by Angela Gibbs.
Vivian has also brought her nightclub act to major gatherings of organizations and dignitaries, including Mercedes Benz, IBM, Top Fashion Designers Gala at the Theatre Champs Elysees and the American Film Festival in Deauville. She appeared at the Festival del Vina in Chile along with other top performers and received the coveted 'Torch Award,' an honor bestowed by the mayor and citizens of Vina for only the most exceptional and stirring performances. Vivian has been featured in the world's most read and influential news and fashion magazines such as Vogue, Elle, Paris Match, People, Ebony, Cover of Jet and Time Magazine.  Her personal style and taste for designer clothes have won her a place on Mr. Blackwell's Best Dressed Women List and she was selected by People Magazine as one of the '25 Most Intriguing People of the Year.'
Vivian has received critical acclaim in major productions of Sophisticated Ladies, Roar of the Greaspaint, Smell of the Crowd, Blues in the Night, Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope, High Rollers, Show Boat in which she portrayed the role of 'Queenie' and Tintypes.  Her recent plays include Blues for an Alabama Sky, Crumbs from the Table of Joy, Pork Pie and Cookin' at the Cookery. Vivian was featured in the highly anticipated Marie Christine at Lincoln Center. She also portrayed Lena Horne in a new piece, More Than A Song with the Pittsburgh Ballet Company at the Benedum Theater in Pittsburgh. Vivian contributed her talents to the Lena Horne Awards Show hosted by Bill Cosby honoring Rosie O'Donnell and Quincy Jones at the Ford Center for the Performing Arts in New York. She appeared in Three Mo' Divas, the follow-up to Three Mo' Tenors at the San diego Rep. and Arena Stage in Washington, DC and as an actress received critical acclaim for her portrayal as Gloria Franklin in The Second Tosca written by Tom Rowan.
Vivian has also given back of her talent by teaching nearly three years at Berklee College of Music in Boston where she created a performance class teaching the many aspects of performing and also establishing a yearly concert event called Singer's Night. Recently she presented her nightclub act to two sold out houses and concluded two book musical workshops 'One For My Baby' and 'The Countess Of Storyville.'
In 2014, Vivian Reed received the 'Kingdom of Excellence Award' an honor bestowed by Dr. Michelle Harris CEO of Vindicated Magazine for her lifetime achievements and spirit of excellence.
Besides her theatrical career she has made a total of six albums, done voice overs and TV commercials and she is a professional photographer and scarf designer....vjr scarves.


== External links ==
Vivian Reed at the Internet Broadway Database 
Vivian Reed on IMDb
Official website


== References ==