University of Nairobi

The University of Nairobi (UoN) is a collegiate research university based in Nairobi. It is one of the largest universities in Kenya. Although its history as an educational institution dates back to 1956, it did not become an independent university until 1970. In this year, the University of East Africa was split into three independent universities: Makerere University in Uganda, the University of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania, and the University of Nairobi.
During the 2011 academic year, the university had 61,912 students, of whom 49,488 were undergraduates and 12,424 postgraduates. The university launched several policy frameworks and introduced self-funded enrollment (also called 'module 2') to cope with the rising demand for higher education in Kenya.


== Establishment ==
The inception of the University of Nairobi dates from 1956, with the establishment of the Royal Technical College, which admitted its first group of A-level graduates for technical courses in April the same year. The Royal Technical College was transformed into the second university college in East Africa on 25 June 1961 by the Scottish mathematician Prof James Morton Hyslop formerly of the University of Witwatersrand under the name Royal College of Nairobi and was admitted into a special relation with the University of London whereupon it began preparing students in the faculties of Arts, Science and Engineering for award degrees of the University of London. Meanwhile, students in other faculties such as the Faculty of Special Professional Studies (later renamed Faculty of Commerce) and Faculty of Architecture continued to offer diplomas for qualifications of professional bodies/institutions.
On 20 May 1964, the Royal College Nairobi was renamed University College Nairobi as a constituent college of inter-territorial, Federal University of East Africa, and henceforth the enrolled students were to study for college degrees of the University of East Africa and not London as was the case before. In 1970, it transformed into the first national university in Kenya and was renamed the University of Nairobi. The university tops in Kenya's university ranking and is ranked 7th in Africa and 1698 in the world according to Webometrics Ranking of World Universities.


== History ==
The idea of an institution for higher learning in Kenya goes back to 1947 when the Kenya government drew up a plan for the establishment of a technical and commercial institute in Nairobi. By 1949, this plan had grown into a concept aimed at providing higher technical education for Kenya. In September 1951, a Royal Charter was issued to the Royal Technical College, Nairobi and the foundation stone of the college was laid in April 1952.
During the same period, the Asian Community of Kenya was also planning to build a college for Arts, Science and Commerce as a memorial to Mahatma Gandhi. To avoid duplication of efforts, Gandhi Memorial Academy Society agreed to merge interests with those of the Kenyan Governments. Thus, the Gandhi Memorial Academy was incorporated into the Royal Technical College, Nairobi in April 1954, and the college proceeded to open its doors to the first intake of students in April 1956.
Soon after the arrival of students at the college, the pattern of higher education in Kenya came under scrutiny. Through the recommendation of a working party formed in 1958, chaired by the Vice-Chancellor of the University of London, Sir John Lockwood, the Royal Technical College, Nairobi was transformed. On 25 June 1961, the college became the second university college in East Africa, under the name "Royal College Nairobi."
The Royal College Nairobi was renamed "University College, Nairobi" on 20 May 1964. On the attainment of "University College" status, the institution prepared students for bachelor's degrees awarded by the University of London, while also continuing to offer college diploma programmes. The University College Nairobi provided educational opportunities in this capacity until 1966 when it began preparing students exclusively for degrees of the University of East Africa, with the exception of the Department of Domestic Science. With effect from 1 July 1970, the University of East Africa was dissolved and the three African countries of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania each had its own national universities. This development saw the birth of the University of Nairobi set up by an Act of Parliament.
Since 1970, the university had grown from a faculty based university serving a student population of 2,768 to a college focused university serving over 68,000 students.


== Profile ==
It is a body corporate established under the Universities Act 2012 of the Laws of Kenya and the Charter.
Through module II and III programmes, opportunity has been opened to thousands of Kenyans and foreigners, on a paying basis, who meet university admission requirements, but who have not been able to access university education due to restricted intake into the regular programmes that is determined by limited resource allocation by Government. In addition to the regular and evening and weekend programmes, classes are conducted at the University's Extra-Mural Centres located at the country's county headquarters.
The university is admitting students to undertake courses in the proposed Koitalel Arap Samoei University College for law, business management and education courses that began in January 2015. This is a joint project of the County Government of Nandi and the University of Nairobi


== Colleges ==
The university underwent a major restructuring in 1983, resulting in a decentralisation of the administration, by the creation of six colleges headed by principals.
The six colleges are: College of Architecture and Engineering, College of Health Sciences, College of Biological and Physical Sciences, College of Humanities and Social Sciences, College of Agriculture and Veterinary Sciences and College of Education and External Studies.


== Faculties/schools/centres/institutes ==
African Women's Studies Centre
Center for Sustainable Dryland Ecosystems and Societies
Center of Open and Distance Learning
Centre For Biotechnology & Bioinformatics
Centre for Hiv Prevention And Research
Centre for Urban Innovations
Education For Change
Faculty of Agriculture
Faculty of Arts
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Institute for Climate Change and Adaptation]
Institute For Development Studies
Institute of Anthropology, Gender & African Studies
Institute of Diplomacy and International Studies
Institute of Nuclear Science & Technology
Institute of Tropical & Infectious Diseases
Kenya Science Campus
Kisumu Campus
Mombasa Campus
Open, Distance and eLearning Centre
Physical Sciences
Population Studies And Research Institute
School of Arts and Design
School of Biological Sciences
School of Business
School of Computing and Informatics
School of Continuing and Distance Education
School of Dental Sciences
School of Economics
School of Education
School of Engineering
School of Journalism
School of Law
School of Mathematics [1]
School of Medicine
School of Nursing
School of Pharmacy
School of Physical Science
School of Public Health
School of the Built Environment
The Wangari Maathai Institute for Peace and Environmental Studies


== Departments ==
Academic Division
African Clothing and Footwear Research Network (ACFRN)
African Women's Studies Centre
Agricultural Economics
Animal Production
Arabic
Architecture
Biochemistry
Business Administration
Chemistry Department
Civil and Construction Engineering
Clinical Medicine and Therapeutics
Clinical Studies
Commercial Law
Communication Skills and Studies
Confucius
Conservative and Prosthetic Dentistry
Diagnostic Imaging & Radiation Medicine
Distance Studies
Education Administration and Planning
Education Communication and Technology
Education Studies
Educational Foundations
Electrical and Information Engineering
Envrironmental and Biosystems Engineering
Ethics and Research Committee
Extra Mural Studies
Finance & Accounting
Food Science, Nutrition and Technology
French
Geography
Geology Department
Geospatial and Space Technology
History
Human Anatomy
Human Pathology
ICT
Information Science
Kiswahili
Korean Studies
Land Resource Management & Agricultural Technology
Linguistics
Literature
Management Science
Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering
Medical Microbiology
Medical Physiology
Meteorology
Obstetrics & Gynaecology
Ophthalmology
Orthopaedic Surgery
Paediatrics/Dentistry and Orthodontics
Paedriatics
Periodontology/Community and Preventive Dentistry
Pharmaceutical Chemistry
Pharmaceutics and Pharmacy Practice
Pharmacology and Pharmacognosy
Philosophy
Physical Education and Sports
Physics
Plant Science and Crop Protection
Political Science
Private Law
Psychiatry
Psychology
Public Health Pharmacology & Tox
Public Law
Real Estate and Construction Management
Sociology and Social Work
Surgery
Surgery, Oral Medicine/Pathology, Oral/Maxillofacial Radiology
Translation
Urban And Regional Planning
Vet Farm
Vet. Anatomy And Physiology
Veterinary Pathology, Microbiology & Parasitology


== Rankings ==
In 2017, Times Higher Education ranked the university within the 801–1000 band globally.


== Notable alumni ==

Elijah Ateka, Professor of Plant Virology
Stellah Wairimu Bosire-Otieno, physician and corporate executive
Ali Rasso Dido, National Assembly member
Philo Ikonya, author and human rights activist
Jacob Kaimenyi, Former Education and Lands & Natural resources Cabinet Secretary.
Michael Kamau, Cabinet Secretary
Henry Rotich, Kenya's Finance Cabinet Secretary
Felix Koskei, Cabinet Minister
Joseph Ole Lenku, Cabinet Minister
William Ruto, Deputy President
Wangari Maathai, Nobel peace prize laureate
James Wainaina Macharia, Health Minister
Fred Matiangi, Cabinet Minister
Adan Mohammed, Cabinet Minister
Stephen Sang, The Second Governor of Nandi County
Musalia Mudavadi, Former Deputy Prime Minister and Former Vice-President
Sylvia Mulinge, corporate executive
Margaret Muthwii, Vice-Chancellor of Pan Africa Christian University
Willy Mutunga, Former Chief Justice of Kenya
MaryJane Mwangi, corporate executive
John Nasasira, Ugandan Cabinet Minister
Apolo Nsibambi, Prime Minister of Uganda
Shitsama Nyamweya, neurosurgeon
P.L.O. Lumumba, Professor of Law
Borna Nyaoke-Anoke, physician and medical researcher
Catherine Nyongesa, physician and radiation oncologist
Washington Yotto Ochieng, Professor of Engineering at Imperial College London
James Orengo, Senator
Teodosia Osir, lawyer and corporate executive
Henry Rotich, Finance Minister
Anne Waiguru, Former Cabinet Minister
Hassan Wario, Cabinet Minister
Avril, singer and actress
Troy Onyango, writer and lawyer
Jeff Mutunga,writer
Maina Kiai, human rights activist and UN Special Rapporteur
Wahu Kagwe, Singer actress songwriter entertainer
Dr Wilfred Ochieng Omollo, Planning Officer Kisii University
Dr Thomas Kariuki, Director of Programmes at the African Academy of Sciences
Yobesh Ontiria, Infrastructural Project Management Expert


== See also ==
University of Newcastle, Australia
University of Nottingham
University of Northampton


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to university of Nairobi at Wikimedia Commons