Movement of Free Citizens (Serbia)

The Movement of Free Citizens (Serbian: Покрет слободних грађана, ПСГ / Pokret slobodnih građana, PSG) is a social-democratic and social-liberal political movement in Serbia. It is a centre-left political organization in Serbia, founded after 2017 presidential elections, by Saša Janković, who ended up second with nearly 17% of the vote. It has no representatives in the National Assembly, since it was founded after the last parliamentary elections in Serbia.
The Movement's organizational structure includes Assembly, Presidency, Main board and Council.
Since its inception it has positioned itself as a major opposition movement to government led by Serbian Progressive Party (SNS).


== History ==
Saša Janković was in the position of state ombudsman, and as such, he often criticized practices of the government, led by SNS and Vučić. This positioned him among voters as opposition spokesperson and led to him enjoying relatively high ratings in relation to actual opposition leaders and politicians. As his term was about to end, he decided to resign and run in the presidential elections, scheduled for April 2017. His most notable endorsement came from the Democratic Party, which decided to support Janković, rather than to have a candidate of its own. This helped him create a relatively united front against Vučić in the upcoming elections.
In the aftermath of the elections, Janković, who finished second with 16.3% of the vote, decided to form his own political movement, rather than joining the Democratic Party. His movement "Apel 100", formed for the purposes of gathering support from intellectuals and other notable citizens for his presidential candidacy, was thereby transformed into a political organization, the Movement of Free Citizens.Despite competing against each other in the presidential election, Janković's movement now cooperates closely with the People's Party, a party formed by Vuk Jeremić after the election.Some of the founders of the Movement are Goran Marković, Zdravko Šotra, Nikola Đuričko, Sergej Trifunović, Srbijanka Turajlić, Borka Pavićević and Vlado Georgiev.
Many of the founding members have left the Movement, accusing Janković of running it like his own 'company', and revealed that Janković's wife exerts enormous influence on how the Movement is run. Following the accusations, the Movement's Presidency held an emergency meeting, where Janković offered his resignation, a motion denied by the Presidency. This turmoil within the Movement led political analysts and other opposition leaders and politicians to question the capacity of Janković and the Movement to lead the opposition against Vučić's government.On 17 December Janković resigned. Candidates for the new president were actor Sergej Trifunović and lawyer Aleksandar Olenik. Elections were held on 26 January 2019, and Trifunović won with 60% of the votes. Olenik and most of other high officials left the movement and announced creation of new party.
Trifunović supported protests against Vučić. Movement signed Agreement with people along with other opposition parties on 6 February. Afther nine months of protests and the unsuccessful conclusion of the negotiation mediated by the University of Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences and NGOs, on August 2019, Trifunović wrote an open letter to David McAllister, the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, asking him to consider facilitating a cross-party dialogue. The first round of inter-party European Parliament-mediated dialogue in Serbia took place two months later.


== Presidents of the Movement of Free Citizens (2017–present) ==


=== Acting leaders ===


== Electoral results ==


=== Presidential elections ===


== See also ==
List of political parties in Serbia


== References ==
Notes
Footnotes