Super Mario World (TV series)

Super Mario World is an American animated comedy television series loosely based on the Super NES video game of the same name. It is the third and most recent animated series based on the Mario video game series, with the other two being The Super Mario Bros. Super Show! and The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3. Thirteen episodes of the show were aired, as part of a block with Captain N: The Game Master called Captain N & The New Super Mario World on NBC. Just like The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3, the show is produced by DIC Animation City in association with the Italian studio Reteitalia, S.p.A. and Nintendo of America, Inc. (except it was animated by a Chinese animation studio, Pacific Rim Production, Inc.), who licensed the characters and game to DiC.
The animated series featured the same voice actors who had performed in The Adventures of Super Mario Bros. 3. However, unlike its two predecessors, Toad does not appear in this series. He is replaced by Yoshi, alongside an exclusive character not featured in the games called Oogtar, a clumsy caveboy. The character designs from the last two cartoons are retained, but with minor details. Episodes mainly focused on the Mario Bros. dealing with schemes by King Koopa, and made use of new elements introduced by the video game within the story, though with involvement of the "real world" reduced to mere references for the series. Due to copyright restrictions, no license music were required for this show, leaving the show completely untouched for syndication and home media releases.


== Voice cast ==
Walker Boone as Mario
Tony Rosato as  Luigi
Andrew Sabiston as Yoshi
Tracey Moore as Princess Toadstool (Peach)
John Stocker as Oogtar, Magikoopa, Monty Mole, and Chargin' Chuck
Harvey Atkin as King Bowser Koopa
Tara Charendoff as Iggy "Hip" Koopa and Lemmy "Hop" Koopa
Paulina Gillis as Wendy "Kootie Pie" Koopa
James Rankin as Larry "Cheatsy" Koopa
Dan Hennessey as Roy "Bully" Koopa, Green Dinosaur, and Purple Dinosaur
Michael Stark as Ludwig "Kooky" Von Koopa
Gordon Masten as Morton "Big Mouth" Koopa Jr.
Catherine Gallant as Mama Fireplant
Stuart Stone as additional voices


== Episodes ==


== Broadcast history ==
 USA
NBC (1991–1992)-Aired with Captain N: The Game Master season 3
Syndication (1992-1993)-As part of "Captain N and the Video Game Masters" rerun package
Family Channel (1992–1994)-As part of "Super Mario All-Stars" rerun package
USA Network (1997-1998)-As part of "Super Mario All-Stars" rerun package
PAX Network (1999-2000)-As a standalone show
Starz Encore Family (2018–present)-Re-aired with Captain N: The Game Master season 3 and as a standalone show
 China
China Central Television
 UK
The Children's Channel
Channel 4
Pop
 Australia
Nine Network
KidsCo
 Singapore
MediaCorp Channel 5
 U.A.E.
Channel 33
Spacetoon
 Ireland
RTÉ Two
 Poland
KidsCo
Showmax
 Italy
Italia 1
Frisbee
 France
France 2
KidsCo
 Mexico
ZAZ
 Sweden
STV
 Japan
TV Tokyo
 Hong Kong
ATV World
 Finland
Yle
Nickelodeon
 Spain
KidsCo
 Venezuela
Televen
 Paraguay
Canal 13
 South Africa
SABC1
 El Salvador
Channel 6
 Peru
Pantel
 Chile
Canal 13
Chilevisión
Mega
ETC


== Home media ==
In 1994, Buena Vista Home Video released a VHS tape under their DIC Toon-Time Video label, titled Super Mario Bros. Super Christmas Adventures!, which contained the episode The Night Before Cave Christmas.
On November 13, 2007, Shout! Factory and Vivendi Entertainment released a Complete Series DVD set of Captain N and the New Super Mario World in Region 1, featuring all 13 original, uncut broadcast episodes. The series has also been released in Australia (Region 4) by Roadshow Entertainment.
NCircle Entertainment (under license from Cookie Jar Entertainment) has also released the series in two volumes. They later released the complete series in one set(sans Captain N episodes).


== Legacy ==
A collaborative re-animated version of the episode "Mama Luigi", organized and directed by professional animation and storyboard artist Andrew Dickman, was released on YouTube on August 29, 2017. With 227 animators and artists contributing and participating in the project, the goal was to make a re-animated version of the episode in which each animator is given a scene from the episode and animates in any direction they choose so long as it follows the basic formula of the original scene. The project was announced on July 10, 2016 and was roughly completed a year later with an annotated version available on Newgrounds. The video was praised for not only recapturing the nostalgic moments of the classic episode but for also having the involvement of several artists who worked on the original series. Phil Harnage, the writer for the original episode, praised the video as well. The project was dedicated to the memories of Tony Rosato and Harvey Atkin, who died during the production of the project.


== References ==


== External links ==

Super Mario World on IMDb
Super Mario World at TV.com