Cabin Boy

A cabin boy or ship's boy is a boy (in the sense of low-ranking young male employee, not always a minor in the juridical sense) who waits on the officers and passengers of a ship, especially running errands for the captain.


== Duties ==
Cabin boys were usually 13–16 years old, but sometimes as young as 8, and also helped the cook in the ship's kitchen and carried buckets of food from the ship's kitchen to the forecastle where the ordinary seamen ate. They would have to run from one end of the ship to the other carrying messages and become familiar with the sails, lines and ropes and the use of each in all sorts of weather. They would have to scramble up the rigging into the yards whenever the sails had to be trimmed. They would occasionally stand watch like other crewmen or act as helmsman in good weather, holding the wheel to keep the ship steady on her course.


== Royal Navy officers ==
Several prominent British Royal Navy officers began their career as cabin boys. The list includes officers that achieved an admiralty rank before 1801. 

Admiral of the Fleet Sir William Parker, 1st Baronet of Shenstone
Admiral of the Fleet Sir Cloudsley Shovell
Admiral Sir Francis Drake
Admiral Sir John Hawkins
Admiral (General) Richard Deane
Admiral (Colonel) William Rainsborough
Admiral Sir William Penn
Vice Admiral Lord Nelson
Vice Admiral Sir William Batten
Vice Admiral Sir John Lawson
Vice Admiral (Captain) Badilow
Vice Admiral Sir Thomas Tiddeman
Vice Admiral (Captain) James Peacock
Vice Admiral (Captain) William Goodson
Vice Admiral Sir Christopher Myngs
Vice Admiral Sir John Harman
Rear Admiral Sir John Berry
Rear Admiral Sir Richard Stainer
Rear Admiral (Captain) Anthony Houlding
Rear Admiral (Captain) Deacons
Rear Admiral (Captain) Robert Sansum


== Notable cabin boys ==
John Anglin, cabin boy who received the Medal of Honor during the American Civil War.
Hobart Bosworth, cabin boy on the Sovereign of the Seas who became a famous actor.
Christian Franzen, cabin boy who served in the Wisconsin State Assembly.
Michael Healy, cabin boy in 1854, who became the first African-American to command a ship of the United States Government.
James Machon, cabin boy who received the Medal of Honor during the American Civil War.
Thomas Nickerson, cabin boy on the Essex who later wrote about the shipwreck and subsequent three months of survival at sea.
Frederick Pabst, cabin boy at the age of 14 and Great Lakes Captain at 21. Later became an American brewing pioneer and led Pabst Brewing Company into prominence in the late 1800s.
John H. Paynter, cabin boy who enlisted in 1884, later became a real estate developer and writer of poetry and nonfiction, including the acclaimed Fugitive of the Pearl (1930).
John Ward Westcott, cabin boy at the age of 13 and a Great Lakes captain at 20. He developed a special vessel mail system.


== Popular culture ==

Cori, de Scheepsjongen ("Cori the Cabin Boy"), a comics series by Belgian artist Bob de Moor about a cabin boy working for the Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie in the 16th century.
Cabin Boy, a 1994 film.
"Cabin Boy" a song by Tom Robinson from the 1984/1997 Castaway Northwest CNWVP006 album War Baby.
Captain Pugwash, a British television children's animated series about a hapless captain and his crew; Tom, the cabin boy, is depicted as the most intelligent member of the crew.
Treasure Island, where the main character Jim serves as a cabin boy on the board the ship the Hispaniola.
"Cabin Boy", a short story by Damon Knight.
Renaissance Festival, The Cabin Boys, Pirate Fire Comedy act from Minnesota.


== References ==