Murder of Dušan Jovanović

Dušan Jovanović (Serbian Cyrillic: Душан Јовановић) was a 13-year old ethnic Romani boy from Belgrade, FR Yugoslavia, who was murdered on 18 October 1997 by two 17-year old skinheads. He was beaten to death on the Beogradska street in downtown Belgrade while going from his family home to a nearby grocery store. The only reason for the murder was Jovanović's Romani origin.


== Event ==
Dušan Jovanović was a 13-year old boy who was living with his family in the Beogradska street near the Slavija Square in Belgrade. In the evening of 18 October 1997, Jovanović's father Aleksandar gave the boy some money and sent him to a nearby grocery store to buy Coca-Cola. On the way to the store, Dušan was attacked by two members of the far-right skinhead movement. Upon recognizing his Romani origin, first they ordered him to give the money. Then, they threw him to the asphalt and hit him with shoes while the boy was laying. One of the assaulters then took a broken peace of rain gutter and hit Jovanović with it. The only reason for the assault was Jovanović's apparent Romani origin.When he noticed that it's taking more that usual for the boy to return home, his father Aleksandar Jovanović started looking for him. He found Dušan's blood-covered dead body laying on the street.


== Arrest and trial ==
Police quickly identified the two murderers as 17-year olds Milan Čujić and Ištvan Fendrik from Zemun. In March 1998, the Belgrade District Court sentenced the two to then-maximum sentence for minors: 10 years in the juvenile prison. They were sent to serve their sentences in the Juvenile Prison in Valjevo. Their sentences were later commuted by the court. Fendrik  was released from the prison on 1 April and Čujić on 30 April 2004.While in prison, Fendrik was interviewed for the NIN weekly. He claimed that he was not a member of any political party, nor a neo-nazi, nor member of the hooligans supporting FK Rad, as it was speculated by the media, but admitted that he was influenced by the far-right politics at the time of the murder. Fendrik showed remorse during the interview, and also after he was released. Čujić stated publicly that he feels no remorse.


== Aftermath ==
Soon after the tragedy, Jovanović's family moved to another house in the Mirijevo district of Belgrade. His mother committed suicide by hanging in August 2015 after several failed attempts. Father suffered several heart attacks and two strokes, and died in late 2016.On the tenth anniversary of the murder, 18 October 2007, Serbian president Boris Tadić dedicated memorial plaque for Jovanović in the Beogradska street on the house number 33, in front of which the boy was murdered.


== See also ==
Child murder


== References ==