Ethical Culture Fieldston School

Ethical Culture Fieldston School (ECFS), also referred to as Fieldston,  is a private independent school in New York City. The school is a member of the Ivy Preparatory School League. The school serves approximately 1,700 students with 480 faculty and staff. Jessica L. Bagby has been the Head of School since June 2016.The school consists of four divisions: Ethical Culture, Fieldston Lower, Fieldston Middle, and Fieldston Upper.  Ethical Culture, located on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, and Fieldston Lower, located on the Fieldston campus in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, serve Pre-K through 5th Grade.  The two lower schools feed into Fieldston Middle (6th - 8th grade) and Fieldston Upper (9th - 12th grade)—also located on the Fieldston campus in Riverdale. Ethical Culture is headed by Principal Rob Cousins, Fieldston Lower is headed by Principal Joe McCauley, Fieldston Middle is headed by Principal Chia-Chee Chiu, and Fieldston Upper is headed by Principal Nigel Furlonge. Tuition and fees for ECFS were  $52,993 for the 2019-2020 school year.


== History ==

The school opened in 1878 as a free kindergarten, founded by Felix Adler at the age of 24. In 1880, elementary grades were added, and the school was then called the Workingman's School. At that time, the idea that the children of the poor should be educated was innovative. By 1890 the school's academic reputation encouraged many more wealthy parents to seek it out, and the school was expanded to accommodate the upper-class as well, and began charging tuition; in 1895 the name changed to "The Ethical Culture School", and in 1903 the New York Society for Ethical Culture became its sponsor. The economic diversity that was important then is threatened by an annual tuition that is $52,993 for the 2019-2020 school year. To help continue the school's original mission, Fieldston awards over $15 million in tuition-based financial aid to 22% of the student body.The school moved into its landmark Manhattan building at 33 Central Park West in 1904. The entire school was located in that building until 1928 when the high school division (Fieldston) moved to its 18-acre (73,000 m²) campus on Fieldston Road in the exclusive Fieldston section of Riverdale; the Manhattan branch of the Lower School remained there, and  in 1932 a second Lower School was opened on the Riverdale campus. In 2007, a new middle school was opened on the same Riverdale campus, for the 6th, 7th, and 8th grades.
Ethical Culture was said to pursue social justice, racial equality, and intellectual freedom. The school and the affiliated Ethical Culture Society were havens for secular Jews who rejected the mysticism and rituals of Judaism, but accepted many of its ethical teachings. Additionally, because the institutionalized anti-Semitism of the times established rigid quota systems against Jews in private schools, the Ethical Culture School had a disproportionately large number of Jewish students. Ethical was the only one that did not discriminate because of race, color, or creed."One of the early faculty members was the famous documentary photographer Lewis Hine.
ECFS is not the only Ethical Culture School in the New York City area.  In 1922, an Ethical Culture School was founded in Brooklyn, near Prospect Park, by Julie Wurtzberger Neuman. However, this school is unrelated to the Ethical Culture Fieldston School.


=== A legacy of social activism ===


==== 1970 protest ====
In March 1970, about 60 students occupied the administration building in protest to demand that more black and Puerto Rican students be admitted to the school. They also aimed to have a greater number of minority courses, teachers, advisors, employees. The school agreed to some of the student demands.


==== 2019 protest ====
In February 2019, a video that is believed to be created years previously was discovered by administrators after it was shared during a dispute between students. The students in the video use derogatory and racist language. Students involved who were still enrolled in the school were punished, however some 100 students who felt the actions were not enough staged a sit-in reminiscent of the 1970 protest. The students presented the administrators with twenty demands that included increased racial bias training, more faculty of color, the recruitment of more students of color, and a required ethnic studies course; the students' demands were agreed to and are planned to be implemented over the course of 2–3 years.


== Academics ==
Fieldston dropped its participation in the Advanced Placement Program in 2002 to give its faculty the freedom to offer more innovative, challenging, and thought-provoking material. Students can take AP exams, but the school no longer officially sponsors such courses. While there was some concern that college admissions could be negatively affected, Fieldston's college office worked closely with admissions officers of schools across the country to explain the change and to assure that its students would be evaluated on the quality of its courses, even without the AP designation.


== Athletics ==
Fieldston's athletic program includes 62 teams covering 23 sports. The teams, known as the "Fieldston Eagles," play in the Ivy Preparatory School League against other private schools in the region. The school's hockey team as well as the girls and boys ultimate frisbee teams, however, do not play in the league and schedule their own games.


== Special programs ==
Fieldston Outdoors – a six-week environmental day camp
Weeks of Discovery/Computer Camps – one-week sports, computer, and other activity camps during  school breaks
BeforeSchool and AfterSchool – at the two Lower schools, and AfterSchool in the Middle School
Fieldston Enrichment Program (FEP) – tutoring program for selected public school students in preparation of public and private high school entrance exams and requirements
Young Dancemakers Company – acclaimed summer dance program
City Semester – an interdisciplinary experiential-education based semester program focusing all class on the local: New York City
STS (Students Teaching Students) – a specialized ethics program where Form V & Form VI students (Juniors and Seniors) teach an ethics curriculum to middle schoolers. This curriculum covers a wide range of topics including community norms, relationships, decision-making, navigating choices encountered in middle and high school situations (e.g., around social media, sex, drugs, alcohol, and bullying).


== Notable alumni and former students ==
Among its many notable alumni and former students are:


== Peer schools ==
Ethical Culture Fieldston is a part of the Ivy Preparatory School League, with many of the city's elite private schools. The three high schools Fieldston, Riverdale, and Horace Mann together are known as the "Hill schools," as all three are located within a short walking distance of each other in the Riverdale section of the Bronx, on a hilly area above Van Cortlandt Park.  The three are also involved in inter-school sports rivalry.


== See also ==
Education in New York City


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Ethical Culture Fieldston School at Wikimedia Commons
Official website
Ethical Culture Fieldston School records at New-York Historical Society