The Black Forest Girl (1950 film)

The Black Forest Girl (German: Schwarzwaldmädel) is a 1950 West German drama film directed by Hans Deppe and starring Paul Hörbiger, Sonja Ziemann and Rudolf Prack. It is based on the 1917 operetta of the same title by Leon Jessel and August Neidhart. The film was a huge commercial success, both the biggest hit that year and the most popular film since the war. Within two years fourteen million tickets were sold in West Germany, and on the strength of it Sonja Ziemann and Rudolf Prack topped the popularity charts and received Bambi awards.The film's success revived the popularity of Heimatfilm, which came to dominate the German box office over the coming decade.


== Production ==
It was made at the Tempelhof Studios in Berlin while Location shooting took place in the Black Forest. The film's sets were designed by the art director Gabriel Pellon. Shot in Agfacolour, it was the first colour film to be shot in western Germany since the Second World War. An East German production Heart of Stone was also made in colour the same year.


== Cast ==
Paul Hörbiger as Domkapellmeister
Sonja Ziemann as Bärbele Riederle
Rudolf Prack as Hans Hauser, a painter
Gretl Schörg as Malwine Heinau, a revue star
Walter Müller as Richard Petersen
Lucie Englisch as Lorle
Fritz Kampers as Jürgen, host of "Blauen Ochsen"
Ernst Waldow as Fritz Bussmann, a jeweler
Hans Richter as Theo Patzke
Kurt Seifert as Mann auf der Straße
Kurt Zehe as Gottlieb, a farmhand
Trude Wilke-Roßwog as Traudel Riederle
Kurt Pratsch-Kaufmann as Staubig, an accountant
Franz-Otto Krüger as Conférencier
Kurt Schöpp as Dompropst


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Bergfelder, Tim (2005). International Adventures: German Popular Cinema and European Co-productions in the 1960s. Berghahn Books. ISBN 978-1-57181-539-2.
Braun, Rebecca; Marven, Lyn, eds. (2010). Cultural Impact in the German Context: Studies in Transmission, Reception, and Influence. Camden House. ISBN 978-1-57113-430-1.
Pommerin, Reiner, ed. (1997). The American Impact on Postwar Germany. Berghahn Books. ISBN 978-1-57181-095-3.


== External links ==
The Black Forest Girl on IMDb
The Black Forest Girl is available for free download at the Internet Archive (German dialogue)
The Black Forest Girl at filmportal.de/en