Heldorado

Heldorado  is a 1946 American Western film starring Roy Rogers set during the annual Helldorado Days celebrations in Las Vegas. It was the last teaming of Roy and comedy relief sidekick Gabby Hayes. Hayes shares a scene with Pat Brady who later became Rogers' comedy relief sidekick.


== Plot ==
Roy Rogers is a Captain in the Nevada Rangers who plans to take some well earned leave to go to Helldorado celebrations. His leave is interrupted when the Sheriff of Clark County, Nevada requests his help to investigate money laundering being done by an organized crime syndicate.  The Syndicate uses impoverished local playboy Alec Baxter to launder thousand dollar bills at the gaming tables of the casinos of the state.
During this time socialite Carol Randall is elected Queen of the Helldorado Rodeo and is also made a deputy sheriff.  When Alec is murdered Carol uses her badge and wiles to investigate Alec's murder that brings her into conflict with Captain Rogers. The Syndicate is awaiting a new shipment of funds to launder and tries to assassinate Roy during the Helldorado treasure hunt.


== Cast ==
Roy Rogers ...  Nevada Ranger Captain Roy Rogers  Trigger  ...  Trigger, Roy's Horse  George 'Gabby' Hayes  ...  Gabby  Dale Evans  ...  Carol Randall  Paul Harvey  ...  C.W. Driscoll  Brad Dexter  ...  Alec Baxter (billed as Barry Mitchell)  
John Bagni  ...  Johnny 
John Phillips  ...  Sheriff  
Malcolm 'Bud' McTaggart  ...  Bellboy Rex Lease  ...  Charlie the Bartender Steve Darrell  ...  Mitch 
LeRoy Mason  ...  State Ranger  
Charles Williams  ...  Carnival Judge  Eddie Acuff  ...  Carnival Shooting-Gallery Attendant  Pat Brady  ....  Himself Bob Nolan and the Sons of the Pioneers


== Songs ==
HeldoradoWritten by Jack Elliott
Performed by Roy Rogers and the Sons of the Pioneers

Good NeighborWritten by Jack Elliott
Performed by Roy Rogers and Dale Evans

My Saddle Pals and IWritten by Roy Rogers
Performed by Roy Rogers and the Sons of the Pioneers

Silver Stars, Purple Sage, Eyes of BlueWritten by Denver Darling
Performed by Roy Rogers

You Ain't Heard Nothin' Till You Hear Him RoarWritten by Bob Nolan
Performed by Pat Brady and the Sons of the Pioneers


== Quotes ==
Don't put on that badge until Halloween - Roy to Deputy Sheriff Carol 
(after releasing Carol imprisoned inside a refrigerator) Does the light go out inside? - Roy


== External links ==
Heldorado on IMDb