Title: Oak Hill Academy (Mouth of Wilson, Virginia)
Aspects: {'Oak Hill Academy'}

Oak Hill Academy is a co-educational, private, Baptist-affiliated Christian secondary school in Mouth of Wilson, Virginia, United States. Oak Hill's enrollment of approximately 150 students is 98% boarders, serving grades 8–12. It is accredited by the Virginia Association of Independent Schools.


== History ==
In 1873, Oak Hill Academy was voted establishment by the New River Baptist Association of Virginia and held its first classes in the Fall of 1878.


== Athletics ==
Sports offered at Oak Hill include, for boys: Gold, Red, and White basketball, baseball, and tennis, while for girls includes, volleyball, cheerleading, and tennis.


==== Basketball program ====
The Oak Hill Academy Warriors basketball program is considered by some as one of the top prep basketball teams in the nation, having produced future NBA Hall of Famers Carmelo Anthony and Kevin Durant. In 2017, USA Today ranked Oak Hill as the third best basketball program of the decade
Under head coach Steve Smith, the Oak Hill Warriors was crowned "National High School Champions" nine times from  1993, 1994, 1999, 2001, 2004, 2007, 2012 and most recently in 2016.Oak Hill Academy Basketball Hall of Fame inductees:
Calvin Duncan
Rod Strickland
Jerry Stackhouse
Josh Smith
Carmelo Anthony
Ron Mercer


== Notable basketball players ==

Chris Brown, played for Oregon State University
Eric Devendorf, former player at Syracuse University and a 2006–07 All-Big East Honorable Mention selection.
Keith Gallon, played one year at the University of Oklahoma
Jamont Gordon, former player at Mississippi State University
Justin Gray, standout player at Wake Forest University.
Sean Green, played at Iona College and briefly in the NBA
Venson Hamilton, player at University of Nebraska
Lamont Jones, currently plays for Mitteldeutscher
Marco Porcher Jimenez, currently plays for Müester Pro B League - Germany
Alex Legion, currently plays for Fortitudo Bologna
Landon Milbourne, currently plays for Vanoli Cremona
K.C. Rivers, currently plays for Panathinaikos
Travis Watson, last played for Lugano Tigers
Curtis Staples, drafted by the Chicago Bulls in 1998. Eighth in NCAA career three-point field goals, at 413.
D'Vauntes Smith-Rivera, last played for Koroivos
Juwan Staten, former player at West Virginia University, and a 2× First-team All-Big 12 selection.
Keldon Johnson, NBA basketball player for the San Antonio Spurs. Played college basketball at Kentucky Wildcats
Lindell Wigginton, college basketball player for the Iowa State Cyclones. Has declared for the 2019 NBA Draft.
Oliver Lynch-Daniels, current guard for the Houston Baptist Huskies
Cole Anthony, commit to North Carolina and the number 1 ranked point guard in the class of 2019.


=== NBA players ===
Jordan Adams, played for the Memphis Grizzlies, was the 22nd overall pick in the 2014 NBA draft.
Cory Alexander, played at the University of Virginia and in the NBA
Carmelo Anthony, played at Syracuse University; drafted third in 2003; 2003 NCAA Champion; NBA All-Star; attended Towson Catholic High School in Baltimore before transferring.
William Avery, former Duke University point guard, and former NBA player for the Minnesota Timberwolves.
Michael Beasley, transferred to Notre Dame Prep, 2007 McDonald's All American Game MVP, played at Kansas State University. Selected second in the 2008 NBA draft.
Mark Blount, played at the University of Pittsburgh
Alex Blackwell, played at Monmouth College and briefly in the NBA
Steve Blake, played at the University of Maryland, who last played for the Detroit Pistons in the NBA
Dwayne Bacon, played at Florida State University, current NBA player for the Charlotte Hornets.
Junior Burrough, played at the University of Virginia and briefly for the Boston Celtics in the NBA
Quinn Cook, currently plays for the Los Angeles Lakers, as of the 2019-2020 season. NBA Champion.
Ben Davis, played at the University of Arizona and briefly in the NBA
Kevin Durant, (transferred to Montrose Christian School before graduating) played at The University of Texas; second pick in 2007 NBA draft; MVP of the 2006 McDonald's All American Game; NBA Rookie of the Year; NBA All-Star; NBA MVP, NBA Champion 
DeSagana Diop, former NBA player for the Dallas Mavericks and Charlotte Bobcats, current coaching associate of the Utah Jazz.
Harry Giles, (briefly attended due to injury, Later transferred to Forest Trail Academy before graduating), played at Duke University, 20th pick in the 2017 NBA Draft, current NBA player for the Sacramento Kings.
A. J. Hammons, played for the Dallas Mavericks and Miami Heat
Stephen Jackson, former NBA player, 2003 NBA Champion, and most recently of the Los Angeles Clippers.
Brandon Jennings, former NBA player, current washout, most recently for the Washington Wizards, selected 10th in the 2009 NBA draft. Played for Italy's Lottomatica Roma.
Doron Lamb, McDonald's All-American; played at University of Kentucky; player for the Milwaukee Bucks and the Orlando Magic.
Ty Lawson, current NBA player for the Washington Wizards, played at the University of North Carolina. Went to Bishop McNamara High School before going to Oak Hill Academy.
Jeff McInnis, played at the University of North Carolina; former player on Portland Trail Blazers, Los Angeles Clippers, and the New Jersey Nets.
Ben McLemore, plays for Sacramento Kings, selected 7th overall in NBA Draft
Ron Mercer, played at the University of Kentucky from 1995–1997; played for 7 NBA teams
Billy Preston, NBA player for the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Josh Reaves, plays for the Dallas Mavericks; attended Penn State
Rajon Rondo, played at the University of Kentucky; drafted 21st in the NBA draft, won the 2008 NBA championship; an All-Star in 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. Currently plays for the Los Angeles Lakers.
Josh Smith, drafted first round, 17th pick by the Atlanta Hawks in the 2004 NBA draft. Last played for the New Orleans Pelicans.
Nolan Smith, played for Duke University, in the NBA for the Portland Trail Blazers. Nolan is the son of Derek Smith, who starred at the University of Louisville.
Jerry Stackhouse, played at the University of North Carolina and in the NBA for six teams. Currently the head coach of the Vanderbilt Commodores men's basketball team.
Rod Strickland, played at DePaul University and drafted 19th in the 1988 NBA draft. 17 seasons in the NBA for the Portland Trail Blazers and the Washington Wizards.
Sindarius Thornwell, played for The University of South Carolina, drafted by Milwaukee Bucks and traded to the Los Angeles Clippers
Marcus Williams, 2004 National Championship with UConn. Played with the New Jersey Nets, Golden State Warriors, the Memphis Grizzlies and in Serbia and Spain.
Troy Williams, plays for the Sacramento Kings


== References ==


== External links ==
Oak Hill Basketball official site
Oak Hill boys' basketball page at MaxPreps.com
The Association of Boarding Schools profile