Title: Luqman (sūrah)
Aspects: {'Q31'}

Luqmān (Arabic: لُقْمَان) is the 31st chapter (sūrah) of the Muslim holy book, the Qur'an. It is composed of 34 verses (āyāt) and takes its title from the mention of the sage Luqman in verses 12–19. It was, according to Islamic traditional chronology (asbāb al-nuzūl), revealed in the middle of Muhammad's Meccan period, and is thus usually classified as a Meccan sura.


== Context ==
The focus of this sura, once broken down into its many elements, can be seen as emphasizing principles of moderation. The sura uses the mustard seed analogy to emphasize the degree to which God maintains his purview over man's actions, possibly emphasizing the fact that any evil or good deed no matter how small is recorded and will be brought out by Allah in the day of judgement. A final point of focus for Sura 31 comes down to the purpose of God's creation. 31:29 and 31:20 show how God's intention through creation was to better mankind, and his signs are theoretically everywhere, from rain to vegetation. This emphasis once again reminds people of their subservience to Allah while also driving home the idea that man is meant to do good on Earth. Man's purpose is to serve God, while the Earth has been created in order to facilitate man's needs.


== Structure ==
Sura 31 features many intertextual references, a quality that Quranic narrative is known for. Enhanced by what Carl Ernst calls "ring structure" Sura 31 can be reinterpreted based on its inherent conceptual breaks.This is the proposed breakdown of Surah 31 and its "ring structure":A: Verses 1-11 Omniscience and self-sufficiency  of God for the betterment of mankind pt.1
Verses 2-5: The Righteous are mentioned and their good habits are encouraged
Verses 6-7: The disbelievers are highlighted, contrasting the early practices of pious practicers
Verses 8-11: Paradise is revealed as reward, God's omnipotence is prominently highlighted as being predominantly for the betterment of man B: Verses 12-15 Rules and guidelinesVerses 12-13: Luqman bequeaths knowledge to his son, No partners may be ascribed to Allah, and He is the highest power
Verse 14: Obey and be good to parents, a powerful reference to the struggle of motherhood
Verse 25: It is reiterated that believers should not obey those [parents] which ascribe partners to God
X: Verses 16-17 The chiastic middle
Verse 16: Omnipotence of God is compared to ability to see everything [i.e. the size of a mustard seed]
Verse 17: It is revealed through prayer, forbidding wrong, and employing moderation, are the values a believer should aspire too.
B': Rules and guidelines pt. 2 
Verses 18-19: Employ manners and moderation in society to better follow Allah
A': Verses 20-34 Omniscience and self-sufficiency  of God for the betterment of mankind pt. 2
Verses 20-21: Disbelievers are called out once again and reminded of their punishment
Verses 22: Believers counter the disbelievers
Verse 23: The Prophet should not be sad that disbelievers are astray
Verse 24-34 The Omnipotence and infinite scope of God's power is reiterated
Verse 29-32: All of God's acts are for the betterment of mankind
Verses 34-34: Judgement day is a bookend, emphasizing the need for right practice and submission to God


== References ==


== External links ==