Title: QAD Inc.
Aspects: {'QAD'}

QAD Inc. is a software company that provides enterprise resource planning (ERP) software and related enterprise software to manufacturing companies. The company has customers in over 100 countries around the world.


== History ==
QAD was founded in 1979 by Pamela Lopker, who serves as president. QAD initially developed proprietary software applications for manufacturing companies in Southern California.
In 1984, QAD announced MFG/PRO, which was built using Progress Software Corporation's Fourth Generation Language (4GL) and relational database. MFG/PRO was one of the first software applications built for manufacturers following the APICS principles. MFG/PRO was also one of the first applications to support closed-loop Manufacturing Resource Planning (MRP II), as well as operation in open systems. QAD software supports lean manufacturing principles and interoperates with other systems via open standards. QAD stock began trading as of its initial public offering (IPO) on August 6, 1997.[2]In 2003, a product called Supply Visualization (since rebranded to Supplier Portal) was first hosted in a multi-tenant configuration for QAD customers and those customers' suppliers, establishing QAD as a player in providing Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) software for manufacturers. QAD Supplier Portal continues to allow customers and their authorized suppliers to share information about inventory, scheduling, purchase orders, shipments, Kanbans and more. In 2006, QAD announced a user interface called .NET UI, and in 2007 its core product suite name was changed from MFG/PRO to QAD Enterprise Applications. QAD began their cloud apps in 2003, and in 2011 officially launched QAD On Demand, which was later named QAD Cloud ERP.
In 2015, the QAD Cloud ERP software was enhanced further when the Channel Islands User Experience (UX) initiative was launched in phases, named after the Channel Islands off the coast of Santa Barbara, California. In 2017, the QAD Enterprise Platform was released as a way to deliver functionality to users utilizing the Channel Islands UX in QAD Cloud ERP. In 2019, QAD renamed its software portfolio to QAD Adaptive Applications. In addition, QAD's flagship ERP software was renamed QAD Adaptive ERP, which features the Adaptive UX and is built on the QAD Enterprise Platform.
QAD sells its products and services to companies in six main manufacturing industries: automotive, consumer products, high technology, food and beverage, industrial equipment and life sciences. The company’s software portfolio is called QAD Adaptive Applications, which is headlined by QAD Adaptive ERP. QAD Adaptive Applications is designed to streamline the management of manufacturing operations, supply chains, financials, customers, technology and business performance.[3] QAD Adaptive ERP is marketed as SaaS software using cloud computing. ☁


== Acquisitions ==
2006 - QAD acquired Precision Software, a company delivering transportation, global trade and supply chain management software. (2019 - Precision Software renamed QAD Precision)
2006 - QAD acquired Bisgen Ltd., a UK-based company whose product is tailored to the unique sales force and marketing automation needs of manufacturers.
2006 - QAD acquired FBO Systems, Inc., a Georgia-based company and leading provider of enterprise asset management (EAM) products and professional services.
2008 - QAD acquired FullTilt Solutions’ product suite, including Perfect Product Suite, called master data management (MDM) for Internet-enabled commerce.
2012 - QAD acquired CEBOS, a provider of quality management and management system standard software and services. (2019 - CEBOS renamed QAD CEBOS)
2012 - QAD acquired DynaSys, a European provider of collaborative demand and supply chain planning software. (2019 - DynaSys renamed QAD DynaSys)
2018 - QAD acquired PT Iris Sistem Inforindo (PT Iris), a distributor and system integrator for QAD software operating across South Asia, primarily in Indonesia.


== References ==