Title: Movie and Television Review and Classification Board
Aspects: {'R18', 'R rating'}

The Movie and Television Review and Classification Board (Filipino: Lupon sa Rebyu at Klasipikasyon ng Pelikula at Telebisyon; abbreviated as MTRCB) is a Philippine government agency under the Office of the President of the Philippines that is responsible for the classification and review of television programs, motion pictures and home videos.
Unlike other organizations worldwide (such as the BBFC), the Board does not rate video games. Thus, the ESRB system used in the United States is the de facto rating system used in the Philippines, although there have been attempts at formulating an independent local rating system. Certain video game vendors ask for a valid ID or any other verification to be able to buy M- and AO-rated games. The Board also does not rate literature.
The Movie and Television Review and Classification Board also serves as a de facto censorship body.


== The Board ==
The chairman, the vice-chairman and the other 30 Board members compose the Board. Each one holds office for a term of one year but may be reappointed after the expiration of their term. Rachel Arenas is the current Board chairman appointed since January 2017.


=== List of board chairpersons ===


== Classification ratings ==


=== Movies ===


==== Summary ====


==== General Audience (“G”) ====
 G  Viewers of all ages are admitted. A “G” classification advises parents or supervising adults that the film is suitable for all audiences.
A film classified as “G” shall, in the judgment of the Board, meet the following criteria:

Theme – The film should not contain violence, threat, abuse, horror, or other themes that may cause fear or disturbance to a young child’s mind.
Language – The film may contain dialogue or other word representations beyond polite language, but profane, offensive, and sexually-suggestive language or gestures shall not be allowed.
Nudity – The film may contain occasional, as well as natural non-sexual nudity.
Sex – The film cannot contain and depict sexual activity.
Violence – The depiction of any violence must be mild, brief, infrequent, and unlikely to cause undue anxiety or fear to young children.
Horror – The depiction of horror and frightening scenes should be mild, brief, infrequent, and unlikely to cause undue anxiety or fear to young children.
Drugs – There shall be no depiction of, or reference to, prohibited drugs or their use.


==== Parental Guidance (“PG”) ====
 PG  Viewers below 13 years old must be accompanied by a parent or supervising adult. A “PG” classification advises parents or supervising adults that the film may contain any of the elements whose treatment is suitable for children below 13 years of age.
A film classified as “PG” shall, in the judgment of the Board, meet the following criteria:

Theme – The film may contain themes that require parental supervision and guidance, but should not promote any dangerous, violent, discriminatory, or otherwise offensive behavior or attitude.
Language – The film may contain mild and infrequent swear words and menacing language. Offensive, menacing, threatening language and references to sex shall always be suitable for viewers who are below 13 years of age. Infrequent, brief and justifiable sexually-suggestive language may be allowed.
Nudity – The film may contain occasional, as well as natural non-sexual nudity.
Sex – The depiction of non-graphic sexual activity may be allowed, but it should be discreet, infrequent, and not prolonged.
Violence – The depiction of non-gratuitous violence and suffering should be minimal, and without graphic detail;.
Horror – The depiction of brief and infrequent horror and frightening scenes shall be allowed.
Drugs – There shall be no depiction of, or reference to, prohibited drugs or substances and their use.


==== Restricted–13 (“R-13”) ====
 R-13  Only viewers who are 13 years old and above can be admitted. An “R-13” classification advises parents, supervising adults, or the would-be viewers themselves, that the film may contain any of the elements that may not be suitable for children below 13 years of age.
A film classified as “R-13” must, in the judgment of the Board, meet the following criteria:

Theme – The film may contain mature themes but is suitable for teenagers above 13 years of age, and shall not gratuitously promote or encourage any dangerous, violent, discriminatory, or otherwise offensive behavior or attitude.
Language – The film may contain moderate swear words and menacing language consistent with the context of the scene in which they are employed. The use of infrequent and non-vulgar strong swear words or sexually-derived or suggestive expletives and expressions as well as the use of swear words and expletives shall be allowed. The use of sexually-oriented or suggestive language and other references to sex shall always be suitable for viewers who are at least 13 years of age.
Nudity – The film may contain brief, discreet and justifiable occasional, natural and sexually-oriented nudity.
Sex – Discreet, infrequent, brief, non-graphic and justifiable sexual activity may be depicted.
Violence – Infrequent, non-gratuitous, non-graphic and justifiable violence may be allowed.
Horror – The justifiable depiction of horror, frightening scenes, and occasional gore are allowed.
Drugs – The brief, infrequent and justifiable depiction of drugs or their use may be allowed. The movie shall not in any case promote, condone, justify and/or encourage drug use.


==== Restricted–16 (“R-16”) ====
 R-16  Only viewers who are 16 years old and above can be admitted. An “R-16” classification advises parents and supervising adults that the film may contain any of the elements that may not be suitable for children below 16 years of age.
A film classified as “R-16” must, in the judgment of the Board, meet the following criteria:

Theme – There are no restrictions on themes; provided that the treatment is appropriate for viewers who are at least 16 years of age.
Language – The film may use any kind of language.
Nudity – The film may contain discreet, non-gratuitous and justifiable natural and sexually-oriented nudity.
Sex – Non-graphic, non-gratuitous and justifiable sexual activity may be depicted.
Violence – Non-gratuitous and justifiable violence and gore may be allowed.
Horror – The non-gratuitous and justifiable depiction of horror, frightening scenes, and gore are allowed.
Drugs – The non-gratuitous and justifiable depiction of drugs or their use may be allowed. The movie shall not in any case promote, condone, and encourage drug use.


==== Restricted-18 ("R-18") ====
 R-18  Only viewers who are 18 years old and above can be admitted. An “R-18” classification advises viewers, parents, and supervising adults that the film may contain any of the elements that may not be suitable for children below 18 years of age.
An “R-18” rating does not mean that the film is “obscene”, “offensive”, or “pornographic,” as these terms are defined by law.
A film classified as “R-18” must, in the judgment of the Board, meet the following criteria:

Theme – There are no restrictions on themes and their treatment.
Language – The film may use any kind of justifiable language.
Nudity – The film may contain non-gratuitous and justifiable sexually-oriented nudity.
Sex – The realistic depiction of non-gratuitous and justifiable sexual activity may be allowed.
Violence – There are no restrictions on the depiction of non-gratuitous and justifiable violence.
Horror – The justifiable depiction of horror, frightening scenes, and gore are allowed.
Drugs – The justifiable depiction of drugs or their use may be allowed. In no case, however, should the use of drugs be promoted, condoned, justified and/or encouraged.


==== Not for Public Exhibition (“X”) ====
 X  “X-rated” films are not suitable for public exhibition.
A film shall be disapproved for public viewing if, in the judgment of the Board:

The average person, applying contemporary community standards and values, would find that the dominant theme of the work, taken as a whole appeals solely to the prurient interest and satisfies only the craving for gratuitous sex and/or violence.
The film depicts in a patently lewd, offensive, or demeaning manner, excretory functions and sexual conduct such as sexual intercourse, masturbation and exhibition of the genitals.
The film clearly constitutes an attack against any race, creed, or religion.
The film condones or encourages the use of illegal drugs and substances.
The film tends to undermine the faith and confidence of the people in their government and/or duly-constituted authorities.
The film glorifies criminals or condones crimes.
The film is libelous or defamatory to the good name and reputation of any person, whether living or dead.
The film may constitute contempt of court or of a quasi-judicial tribunal, or may pertain to matters which are subjudicial in nature.A much publicized use of the X rating by the MTRCB was the issuance of such rating to To Live for the Masses, a documentary film portraying the life of former Philippine president Joseph Estrada in 2006. Certain portions of the film, especially the portions with regard to the 2001 EDSA Revolution, were deemed by the MTRCB to be inciting political rebellion, a charge denied by the producers of the documentary.


=== Television ===
The MTRCB has implemented a television content rating system since November 1, 1995. Historically, there were only two television ratings used (see the table below). These ratings consisted of a plain text digital on-screen graphic (or pictogram) appearing on the corner of the screen during a program's run time:

However, on October 6, 2011, in order to encourage parents to supervise and be responsible with their children in watching television, the rating system was reformatted, with one additional rating added.The ratings notice are always played before the start or midway of the show. The rating voice-overs are usually in Filipino, but predominantly English-language stations have the ratings notice spoken in English. Ratings notices were previously broadcast in a 4:3 aspect ratio, but has since been broadcast in a 16:9 widescreen format.
The green 'G', blue 'PG' and red 'SPG' graphic/DOG below are usually seen on the lower right or upper left corner of the screen during the entire show.


==== General Patronage (“G”) ====

 G  Suitable for all ages. Material for television, which in the judgment of the Board does not contain anything unsuitable for children.
It appears in most home shopping blocks, newscasts, documentaries, education, and religion-oriented programming.
A pictogram advisory accompanied by full-screen written verbal advisory to the effect that the program is classified as “General Patronage” shall be broadcast for at least 10 seconds immediately before the opening credits of the particular television material classified as such.


==== Parental Guidance / Patnubay at Gabay (“PG”) ====

 PG  Parental guidance suggested. Material for television, which, in the judgment of the Board, may contain some adult material that may be permissible for children to watch but only under the guidance and supervision of a parent or adult.
The television program classified as “PG” must, in the judgment of the Board, meet the following criteria:

Theme – More serious issues may be tackled but the treatment must be suitable to children below 13 years old.
Language – Very mild swear words only shall be allowed. Use of a strong expletive in a sexual context or sexually-based expletives shall not be allowed. Neither shall prolonged and/or successive use of expletives be allowed.
Nudity – Occasional natural, non-sexual nudity, is permissible.
Sex – Graphic depiction of sexual activity shall not be permitted. Sexual activity may be implied but with no details shown.
Violence – There should be no glamorization of weapons and crimes. No detail of fighting or other dangerous techniques. No detail or prolonged showing of violence or suffering.
Horror – Scary sequences must be mild and brief.
Drugs – There may only be implied depiction of prohibited drugs and/or substances or their use provided it does not condone, encourage or glamorize drug and/or substance use and it should be necessary to the theme and characterization.A pictogram advisory accompanied by full-screen written and verbal advisory to the effect that the program is classified as “Parental Guidance” shall be broadcast for at least 10 seconds immediately before the opening credits of the particular television material classified as such.


==== Strong Parental Guidance / Striktong Patnubay at Gabay (“SPG”) ====
 
 SPG  Stronger and more vigilant parental guidance is suggested. Programs classified as “SPG” may contain more serious topics and themes, which may not be advisable for children to watch except under the very vigilant guidance and presence of a parent or an adult.
Television programs classified as “SPG” must still fall within the parameters of the existing Parental Guidance classification rating. However, to merit the issuance of an “SPG” rating, the gravity of the material must, in the judgment of the Board, be leaning towards the maximum allowable for Parental Guidance rating. In determining the proper classification rating, the Board shall consider the purpose, genre, and time slot of the program as well as the treatment and depiction of attendant factors such as, but not limited to: Theme (Tema), Language (Lenggwahe), Violence (Karahasan), Sex (Sekswal), Horror and Drugs (Droga).
In the exercise of its judgment, the Board shall take due consideration of balancing the interest of the State to protect the welfare of the youth with the interest of the broadcast networks to freedom of expression.
A pictogram advisory accompanied by a full-screen written advisory with voice over to the effect that the program is classified as “Strong Parental Guidance” shall be broadcast for at least 20 seconds, immediately before the opening credits and midway in the full airing of the particular television material classified as such. The full-screen advisory shall specifically declare the content descriptors pertinent to the program being shown, such as but not limited to: Theme (Tema), Language (Lenggwahe), Violence (Karahasan), Sex (Sekswal), Horror and Drugs (Droga).
The SPG rating was implemented on February 9, 2012.


==== Disapproved for Airing on Television ("X") ====
Any television program that does not conform to the “G”, “PG”, and “SPG” classification shall be disapproved for television broadcast. The material shall be disapproved for television broadcast if, in the judgment of the Board applying contemporary Filipino cultural values as standard, it is objectionable for being immoral, indecent, contrary to law and/or good customs, injurious to the prestige of the Republic of the Philippines or its people, or with a dangerous tendency to encourage the commission of violence, or of a wrong, or crime, such as but not limited to:

The work depicts in a patently lewd, offensive, or demeaning manner, excretory functions, and sexual conduct such as sexual intercourse, masturbation and exhibition of the genitals.
The work clearly constitutes an attack against any race, creed or religion.
The work condones or encourages the use of illegal drugs and substances.
The work tends to undermine the faith and confidence of the people in their government and/or duly constituted authorities.
The work glorifies criminals or condones crimes.
The work is libelous or defamatory to the good name and reputation of any person, whether living or dead.
The work may constitute contempt of court of a quasi-judicial tribunal, or may pertain to matters, which are subjudicial in nature.All programs shown by the television channels are reviewed and classified by the said board. The board may suspend, reject or cancel programs, but cannot revoke broadcast licenses.


==== Exemptions ====
National and local newscasts are exempted from the ratings system (except in the case of selected news stories, such as in ABS-CBN's TV Patrol, which uses an SPG graphic for stories with sensitive or graphic content). Some regional news programs and some CNN Philippines newscasts air a PG advisory before the show, which may violate the rules. These circumstances, however, do not affect the program itself.MTRCB cannot censor, rate, and use its power in films and shows presented in the University of the Philippines Film Center and its various grounds and venues.


==== Timeline ====
This timeline shows when did the networks first used the system (this pertains only to the G and PG ratings, the SPG rating has been adopted simultaneously by almost all of the networks).

ABS-CBN, S+A (formerly Studio 23) and PTV on October 6, 2011
UNTV on October 7, 2011
Shop TV on October 8, 2011
GMA Network and GMA News TV on October 10, 2011
5 (formerly TV5), IBC and 5 Plus (formerly AksyonTV), on October 11, 2011
Net 25 on October 12, 2011
Light Network on October 14, 2011
RPN, RJTV and SBN on October 26, 2011
BEAM TV on October 30, 2011
GNN and Global Pinoy Cinema on October 31, 2011
SMNI (selected programs only) on January 26, 2012
INC TV (formerly GEM TV), on April 12, 2012
Jeepney TV on January 1, 2014
Yey! and Cine Mo! on May 10, 2018
Knowledge Channel on May 25, 2018
Asianovela Channel, Movie Central, Myx and O Shopping (digital platform and Cignal only) on July 30, 2018The board gave a deadline of until October 31, 2011 for the other national, local, cable, and satellite television networks to switch onto the new graphic, although some of the programs adopted the system at a later date, or did not adopt at all. Cable channels (e.g., CNN Philippines and ETC) that are carried by Free TV affiliates are required to follow the new rating system.
Myx, a cable television channel of ABS-CBN, originally adopted the blue PG graphic on October 6 for the majority of their programs, but reverted to the static Parental Guidance DOG only two weeks after, only in showing music videos with graphic content. This was due to the fact that it may be hard to place the PG DOG while a music video is played along with the lyrics being shown at the same time. On February 1, 2018, the music channel started to use a PG DOG which is a text version only when playing music videos. Sometime in April 2018, the DOG was changed into a variation of the blue 'PG' which is in color black. On July 30, 2018, upon the channel's inclusion on ABS-CBN TV Plus, the standard blue 'PG' rating was used again.
Jeepney TV, ABS-CBN News Channel and DZMM TeleRadyo also added the blue 'PG', green 'G' and red 'SPG' graphic at the same time as its mother network, but it is only applied to its public affairs programs which also air on ABS-CBN. Selected programs from Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao contain the blue 'PG' graphic are aired from ABS-CBN Regional such as Agri Tayo Dito, Kapamilya, Mas Winner Ka!, Mag TV Na (three of them were cancelled at the end of June 2018 as a part of cost-cutting measures to digitize all ABS-CBN Regional stations) and various morning shows and public affairs programs (since the end of 2017, one of which is Ano Ngani? of TV-2 Tacloban, Arangkada of TV-2 Cagayan de Oro, Bida Kapampangan of TV-46 Pampanga and Salandigan of TV-4 Bacolod plus Saturday morning editions of Maayong Buntag Kapamilya (TV-3 Cebu) and Maayong Buntag Mindanao (TV-4 Davao) extend their broadcast on Saturday effective from December 2014) with the exception of the green 'G' and red 'SPG' graphics.
Among local cable networks, ABS-CBN's Balls, Global Pinoy Cinema and Lifestyle (formerly Lifestyle Network and relaunched since 2018 as Metro Channel), as well as Solar Entertainment's Solar Sports and Jack TV continue to adopt the earlier static 'Parental Guidance' graphic on their programs (although channels like Cinema One, Pinoy Box Office, Tagalized Movie Channel, Viva TV, Zee Sine, Fox Filipino, AXN Asia, Animax Asia, GEM, History Asia, Lifetime Asia, Crime & Investigation Network Asia, and Fyi Asia, have a full screen advisory regularly aired before the show/movie without the static 'Parental Guidance' graphic) together with Sari-Sari Channel, the newest cable channel owned by TV5 Network Inc. and Viva Communications Inc. starting January 15, 2016.
IBC 13 does not use either the blue 'PG', green 'G' or red 'SPG' graphics on selected programs and documentaries produced by the government-controlled Presidential Communications Group (Philippines) (PCOO), considering that they are information-based materials.
Fox (Asia), Fox Life, National Geographic and Fox Movies use their own rating systems, and Cartoon Network has 'PG' rating systems for selected programs which contains themes, violence, adult content, and thriller.
Since January 1, 2013, Jack TV and CT use the abbreviated PG and SPG on the bottom right corner of the screen indicating the rating of the show. As the channel does not subscribe to MTRCB's new system, the SPG rating does not have sub-ratings.
In May 2018, Yey!, Cine Mo! and Knowledge Channel, which are all exclusive channels for ABS-CBN TV Plus, has began subscribing to the MTRCB rating system. The channels are using the MTRCB advisory before the show starts, and they adopted the green 'G', blue 'PG' and red 'SPG' graphic, replacing the old "(Strong) Parental Guidance" DOG.
Cebu Catholic Television Network (CCTN) didn't show a 'PG' advisory. But, they adopted only the blue 'PG' graphic. In some talk shows, they don't show the blue 'PG' graphic.
For newscasts, the MTRCB DOGs were not present in all newscasts except for the following:

ABS-CBN's TV Patrol, Bandila and News Patrol use the red SPG for sensitive content.
TV5's Aksyon uses the SPG DOG, which is shown permanently on the upper left corner of the screen, for coarse language, usually for Aksyon sa Tanghali, which was the first newscast to be rated 'SPG' by the MTRCB because of their segment "Itimbre Mo Kay Tulfo" where anchor Raffy Tulfo solves issues by calling those involved in the issue, with occasional profanities or other similar insults thrown by both parties which cannot be censored in a live program.
Cebuano News and Kapampangan News, both from CNN Philippines (formerly Solar News Channel and 9TV), show the blue PG advisory at the start but doesn't show the PG DOG during the newscast themselves.


== Home videos ==
The Optical Media Board formerly governed censorship for home video releases; this has since been managed by the MTRCB.
Before 2015, unlike the theatrical ratings, only three are applied to video releases and printed on labels: General Audience (G) for films previously rated G in cinemas, Parental Guidance (PG) for most PG and some R-13 or R-16 titles (with cuts for the R-ratings), and Restricted For Adults (R) for some R-13, many R-16, and most R-18 titles [without cuts for R-16 and R-18, including films released unrated or with adults-only rating equivalents (e.g. R, 18+, M18, NC-17, Category III, R21) outside the Philippines].
Since 2015, the theatrical ratings were applied as home video ratings, replacing the former three-rating system.
In addition to issuing ratings for home video, the MTRCB also conducts routine inspections at public transport terminals where passenger buses equipped with onboard entertainment systems can be found, to ensure that the films in question are approved by the MTRCB and Optical Media Board for public exhibition and are free of obscene content.


== Content reprimand ==
Not only does the MTRCB rates movies and shows, they can also suspend a certain program for a few days to a few months or even impose self-regulation on a certain program depending on the gravity of the violation as a means of disciplinary action. The following are notable events involving local and international television programs which were sanctioned due to the following issues with their content or cast.


=== Content from minor and government television networks ===
On August 16, 2004, MTRCB preemptively suspended the showing of the Ang Dating Daan on UNTV for 20 days due to slander and use of offensive and obscene language by its televangelist-host Eliseo Soriano, as a mean of disciplinary action.
During the 2007 elections, RJTV aired political advertisements for the electoral alliance Genuine Opposition containing offensive and obscene language; they were later pulled off.
On July 27, 2019, People's Television Network's PCSO Lottery Draw the program was put into hiatus following orders from President Rodrigo Duterte to suspend all gambling-related operations of PCSO due to corruption allegations. However, the program partially resumed on July 31 as the President lifted the suspension of the lotto game. Though the Small Town Lottery among other games, which has a segment in the program stayed suspended until August 22, 2019.


=== Content from major television networks ===
On August 6, 1999, Magandang Tanghali Bayan was suspended for 20 days due to inappropriate jokes made by hosts Willie Revillame, Randy Santiago and John Estrada on its segment Calendar Girls.
The controversial suspension of the documentary program I-Witness on GMA Network after it showed "Lukayo", a unique ritual dance from Laguna.
The Eda Nolan's wardrobe malfunction in Wowowee, which happened on May 12, 2007, suspended the show for 3 days.
In January 2010, Showtime was suspended for 20 days due to an inappropriate and disrespectful speech of one of its guest judges Rosanna Roces to the teachers. The Movie and Television Review and Classification Board also directed the filing of criminal charges against Florida Tan, ABS-CBN vice-president for programming, and other officers responsible for the violation. Bong Osorio, head of ABS-CBN's Corporate Communications said that the suspension was not yet final and that they were seeking appeal before the Office of the President. However, the suspension of the variety show lasted for only six days after the Court of Appeals issued a 60-day temporary restraining order against the MTRCB in January 2010, the issuance of the order, and therefore the return of the said show was announced on Magpasikat.
Willing Willie received a month-long suspension after a child performed a suggestive dance while crying in front of the audience and on its live broadcast. It was placed also under probation, meaning that the show needs daily permits from the MTRCB before airing after the suspension was lifted.
The 20-day suspension of T3: Kapatid, Sagot Kita! responses at actors Raymart Santiago and Claudine Baretto on its live broadcast. Before that, a brawl between their brother, Ramon Tulfo and on the latter couple happened in the Ninoy Aquino International Airport Terminal 3. TV5 has questioned the board's decision to suspend the program, stating that the action was heavy-handed and called it an act of censorship, though it was then lifted after a couple of days.
On May 30, 2012 the MTRCB imposed a 3-month suspension to T3: Kapatid Sagot Kita from May 31 to August 31, 2012 without cancellation, regarding to the same issue as above. After the suspension the program will be still under probation, meaning it needs daily permits from the MTRCB before airing until the board is convinced. Chairwoman Grace Poe-Llamanzares stated that MTRCB has the full jurisdiction in the program. However, the suspension was once again lifted on June 21, this time under a 60-day temporary restraining order from the Court of Appeals.
The episode Manika on Maalaala Mo Kaya was slated to be aired on June 2, 2012 but was pulled off after MTRCB granted it rated X regarding the sensitive rape theme. The episode finally aired on June 30, 2012 after given SPG rating for its final televised airing.
On July 29, 2016, the MTRCB sent summons to the producers, writers and directors of FPJ's Ang Probinsyano over a scene in the July 25, 2016 episode (Girl in the Rain) with "sexually suggestive themes", albeit its SPG rating.
Selected programs on music channel Myx are given an SPG rating to warn the audience that there are offensive, indecent, and obscene language in some music videos.
The daily reality-dating game serial Nasaan Ka Mr. Pastillas? on It's Showtime drew the ire of netizens and the women's group Gabriela. Because of various complaints from online social networking sites, MTRCB summoned the show's executives to discuss the segment. After a thorough investigation, MTRCB imposed "self-regulation" on the said show because of the segment.
During the replay broadcast of the FIBA Asia qualifying match on 5, it was given an SPG rating after the commercial break to warn the audience that the following scene will contain some inappropriate segments such as the infamous basketball brawl between Gilas Pilipinas and Australian Boomers during the basketball match.


=== International content ===
On August 1, 1999, Sky Cable axes AXN from its programming lineup due to low and poor content, and too much violence on its programming because it has not yet been reviewed by the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board. In addition to various complaints from its subscribers, no new programming lineup was offered by AXN. The said cable operator replaced it with a business channel, Bloomberg Television. But on other cable operators, the said channel was broadcast without any interruption.
The TV-channel TVE Internacional's broadcast was suspended by the MTRCB because of sexual content. It was only unclear if the broadcast had been stopped only by Sky Cable or all the cable operators nationwide.
The HBO mini-series Entourage was blocked for 3 weeks on Sky Cable because it has not yet been reviewed by the MTRCB. But on other cable operators, the series was broadcast without any interruption.
On October 14, 2019, ten days after its release, Abominable was banned in Vietnam due to the appearance of the Nine-Dash Line in a scene. However, after Universal refused to make the censor cut, it was banned completely in Malaysia. The following day, the Philippines' Movie and Television Review and Classification Board also banned the film.


== Radio ==
The Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster ng Pilipinas (KBP; English: Association of Broadcasters of the Philippines), an association unrelated to the government, governs censorship on radio, although it can only reprimand its own members using the required disciplinary action. Some radio stations have their own PG And SPG advisory before the start of the program should contains mature themes.


== Internet ==
MTRCB does not govern nor censors TV shows and movies on the internet, but video streaming services such as Disney Life, FOX+, iflix, HOOQ, Netflix, and HBO Go use their own content ratings systems.


== Criticism ==
Despite touting itself as promoting Filipino values and "intelligent viewing", the organization has drawn criticism from filmmakers and special interest groups for its vested interest in the film and television industries, de facto censorship, stifling of creative freedoms on the grounds of family-friendliness, and allegations of inaccuracy in film and television ratings.Critics contend that the board has not rated certain media, particularly superhero, action and fantasy films, such as the Harry Potter series and Michael Bay's Transformers, along with locally produced romantic comedies, harshly for violent or sexual themes, noting the arbitrary and biased classification based on board members' opinions on certain films for mature audiences yet overlooking certain scenes or themes that would be given a higher rating elsewhere.


== See also ==
Optical Media Board
Television content rating systems
Motion picture rating system
Politics of the Philippines


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website of the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board
Official website of the Optical Media Board
Official website of the Association of the Philippine Broadcasters