Title: Brussels Ring
Aspects: {'R0'}

The Brussels Ring (Dutch: Grote ring rond Brussel, French: Ring de Bruxelles) numbered R0, is a ring road surrounding the city of Brussels as well as other smaller towns south of Brussels. It is about 75 kilometres (47 mi) long, with 2 or 3 lanes in each direction. While most of it is classified as a motorway (highway), part of it (in the Forêt de Soignes/Zoniënwoud) is merely an express route. It crosses the 3 regions of Belgium: its main part (51.7 kilometres (32.1 mi)) is situated in Flanders, whereas Wallonia comprises 18.2 kilometres (11.3 mi) of the total stretch and 5.5 kilometres (3.4 mi) is on Brussels territory.
The clockwise carriageway is referred to as the inner ring (ring intérieur in French, binnenring in Dutch), while the anticlockwise carriageway is referred to as the outer ring (ring extérieur in French, buitenring in Dutch).
The first sections of the road were built in the late 1950s, but the main part was built during the 1970s, with the end of construction in 1978. The Brussels Ring has interchanges with the European routes E40 (at the Groot-Bijgaarden and Sint-Stevens-Woluwe interchanges), E19 (at the Machelen and Ittre interchanges), E411 (at the Leonard crossroads), and E429 (at the Halle interchange). It also has interchanges with national highways A12 (at the Strombeek-Bever interchange) and A201 (at the Zaventem interchange).


== Course ==
The Strombeek-Bever interchange with the A12 is located in Grimbergen municipality. Going clockwise from there, the ring then crosses the municipalities of City of Brussels, Vilvoorde, Machelen, Zaventem, Kraainem, Wezembeek-Oppem, Tervuren, Auderghem/Oudergem, Watermael-Boitsfort/Watermaal-Bosvoorde, Hoeilaart, Waterloo, Braine-l'Alleud, Braine-le-Château, Halle, Beersel, Drogenbos, Forest, Sint-Pieters-Leeuw, Anderlecht, Dilbeek, Asse and Wemmel. In all the ring crosses 15 municipalities in Flanders, 5 in the Brussels region, and 3 in Wallonia.


== Ramps ==
As well as having 8 interchanges with other highways, the Brussels Ring has 27 ramps (junctions), numbered counterclockwise from 1 to 27:

Ramp 1, also known as Quatre Bras/Vier Armen, leads to Tervuren
Ramp 2 leads to Wezembeek-Oppem, Kraainem and UCL Saint-Luc hospital
Ramp 3, also known as Zaventem-Henneaulaan, leads to Diegem and Zaventem
Ramp 4 leads to Diegem-Woluwelaan, Vilvoorde, Evere and Zaventem
Ramp 5 leads to Machelen
Ramp 6 leads to Koningslo-Vilvoorde
Ramp 7 leads to Grimbergen
Ramp 8 leads to Wemmel, Expo, Strombeek-Bever, Laeken, A12-Willebroek
Ramp 9 leads to Jette, Brugmann hospital and Merchtem
Ramp 10 leads to Zellik, Aalst, Brussels, N9-Asse
Ramp 11 leads to Sint-Agatha-Berchem and Groot-Bijgaarden
Ramp 12 leads to Dilbeek
Ramp 13 leads to Dilbeek, N8-Ninove, Sint-Jans-Molenbeek
Ramp 14 leads to Anderlecht and Moortebeek
Ramp 15 leads to Anderlecht and Pede
Ramp 16 leads to Anderlecht and Sint-Pieters-Leeuw
Ramp 17 leads to Anderlecht-Industries and Brussels-Centre
Ramp 18 leads to Ruisbroek, Drogenbos and Uccle-Stalle
Ramp 19 leads to Lot and Beersel
Ramp 20 leads to Huizingen and Alsemberg
Ramp 21 leads to Halle and E429 Lille-Tournai
Ramp 22 leads to Wauthier-Braine, Tubize and Waterloo
Ramp 23 leads to Ophain and Braine-l'Alleud
Ramp 24 leads to Nivelles, Lillois, Braine-l'Alleud and Parc de l'Alliance
Ramp 25 leads to Genappe, Braine-l'Alleud
Ramp 26 leads to Mont-Saint-Jean
Ramp 27 leads to Waterloo-Centre


== References ==
Wegen-Routes