Title: Smilax glauca
Aspects: {'S. glauca'}

Smilax glauca, the cat greenbriar or catbriar is a woody vine in the family  Smilacaceae. It is native to central and eastern portions of the United States, where it is a common and conspicuous part of the forest vegetation. It is also common across much of Mexico.Smilax glauca has prickly stems and climbs by means of tendrils. Leaves are notably gray-glaucous to whitish beneath. It commonly inhabits wooded areas and fences and is often found growing with other species of Smilax. The plants tend to be evergreen in the more southern United States.


== Description ==
Smilax glauca is a woody vine that succeeds in most soils in sun and in semi-shaded areas. Smilax glauca can grow over trees, shrubs, or stumps. Smilax is a dioecious plant. Smilax glauca is an evergreen climber that can grow to 5 meters, it flowers in June and is leafy all year. Smilax glauca can survive in sandy, loamy, and clay soils. Smilax glauca produces berries generally in the winter. The leaves of Smilax glauca are simple with a single leaf per node that die in the winter. Smilax glauca has fleshy berries. Smilax glauca is a monocot liana.


== Taxonomy ==
The Smilax glauca is a monocot from the family Smilacaceae. The Smilacaceae family comprises herbaceous vines and woody lianas typically with prickles and tendrils. Flowers have six tepals and stamens and the ovule bearing flowers have one superior ovary. Smilax glauca has the common name of cat greenbrier. Some authors recognize two varieties of the species (var. leurophylla and var. genuina) though Flora of Virginia only recognizes one.


== Distribution and habitat ==
Smilax glauca occurs in disturbed habitats such as forest edges and grasslands. The plant is native to much of the Atlantic coast of the USA. Smilax glauca also occurs in wetlands, and can be found in the southeastern US. Smilax glauca is also found in the Ocala National Forest in Florida.


== Fire ecology ==
The Smilax glauca is resistant to fire because it sprouts from rhizomes, canopy openings that are caused by fire favor S. glauca. The immediate effect of fire on the Smilax glauca is being top-killed with resprouting.  Smilax glauca increases in importance after fire in upland southern pine forests.


== Ethnobotany ==
There are a few medicinal uses for Smilax glauca. The stem prickles have been rubbed on the skin to act as a counterirritant to relieve pain and muscle cramps. The stems and leaves have also been used to make a tea that relieves stomach issues. Smilax glauca root can be boiled and made into a jelly like food, and it can be dried and made into a powder.


== References ==