Title: University of Findlay
Aspects: {'U of F'}

The University of Findlay (UF) is a private university in Findlay, Ohio.  It was established in 1882 through a joint partnership between the Churches of God General Conference and the city of Findlay. UF has nearly 60 undergraduate programs of study leading to baccalaureate degrees and offers 10 master's degrees and four doctorate-level degree programs. Nearly 4,200 students from approximately 35 countries are enrolled at Findlay with an international student population of approximately 500. Approximately 1,250 students live on campus in university housing. The University of Findlay has a 73-acre (30 ha) main campus and six off-campus facilities.


== History ==
The predecessor of the University of Findlay, Findlay College, was founded on January 28, 1882 by the city of Findlay and the Churches of God General Conference. By 1897, the college had established an endowment of more than $100,000 and boasted sixteen faculty members. In 1989, Findlay College became known as the University of Findlay. The campus, still affiliated with the Church of God, embarked on a building campaign, adding five new buildings over the next several years. By the start of the twenty-first century, the institution boasted sixty-five different areas of undergraduate study and eight graduate programs. The university is especially well known for its equestrian studies program and offers equestrian riding as a varsity sport. In 2012, the university added structures to Davis Street to host its newly created pharmacy program.


== Academics ==

The University of Findlay established the nation's first bachelor's degree in hazardous waste studies, now known as environmental, safety and occupational health management. The All Hazards Training Center, which grew from that initial program, has provided hands-on training simulations to more than 100,000 people from a wide range of backgrounds, including industry leaders and government officials involved in emergency planning, response and recovery.


=== Notable programs ===

The English equestrian program utilizes a 72-acre (29 ha) farm, named the James L. Child Jr. Equestrian Complex after the late university trustee, houses the English equestrian studies program. Established in 1992, the program has won an Intercollegiate Horse Show Association national title, several reserve championships and numerous individual honors. It also includes University Equine Veterinary Services Inc. and an adjacent, 30-acre nature preserve.
Founded in 1976, the western equestrian program shares a 152-acre farm, the Animal Sciences Center, with the animal science/pre-veterinary medicine program. The western program has earned five Intercollegiate Horse Show Association national championships in the past decade as well as numerous individual honors.
The Nuclear Medicine Institute is a one-year professional program that trains nuclear medicine technologists. It was established in 1966 in Cleveland and joined Findlay in 1984. It is accredited by the Joint Review Committee on Educational Programs in Nuclear Medicine.


=== Mazza Museum ===
The campus includes the Mazza Museum of International Art from Picture Books which contains the largest collection of children's book illustrations in the United States. It has the distinction of being the first and one of the largest teaching museum in the world specializing in original artwork from picture books. Its collection numbers more than 11,000 pieces from award-winning authors and artists. Its mission is to promote literacy through its educational programs and to collect, exhibit and preserve original art from children's books.


=== Outside the classroom ===
There are nearly 100 student organizations, including special interest clubs, student media, student government, performing arts groups, service clubs, academic honorary organizations, spiritual life groups, Greek sororities and fraternities, club sports, and 25 intramural sports. The school also holds a variety of theater productions, art exhibits, and vocal and instrumental music concerts.


=== Accreditation ===
UF is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission and the national accrediting organizations for athletic training, business, environmental health science and protection, intensive English language, nuclear medicine technology, nursing, occupational therapy, pharmacy, physical therapy, physician assistant, social work, strength and conditioning, and teacher education, teaching English to speakers of other languages.


== Athletics ==

The University of Findlay participates in 24 intercollegiate sports: 10 men's (baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, indoor and outdoor track, soccer, swimming and diving, tennis and wrestling); 12 women's (basketball, cheerleading, cross country, dance team, golf, lacrosse, softball, soccer, swimming and diving, tennis, indoor and outdoor track and volleyball); and two mixed sports, western and English equestrian riding.
The University of Findlay is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division II and competes in the Great Midwest Athletic Conference (GMAC). Both equestrian teams are members of the Intercollegiate Horse Show Association. Their mascot is named Derrick the Oiler.The University of Findlay, known athletically as the Oilers, compete as a member of the Great Midwest Athletic Conference (GMAC) of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division II and its student-athletes participate in 23 intercollegiate sports: men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, Western equestrian, English equestrian, football, golf, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field, wrestling; while women's sports include basketball, cheerleading, cross country, dance team, Western equestrian, English equestrian, golf, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming and diving, tennis, track & field and volleyball. The newest varsity sports are western and English equestrian riding, which are mixed sports, although they have predominantly female participants.


== Notable alumni ==
Tim Beckman—former head football coach at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
R. Clint Cole—U.S. Representative
Ralph D. Cole—U.S. Representative
Joanie Dodds—American fashion model
Edward L. Feightner—World War II flying ace, test pilot, and Blue Angels pilot
John W. Grabiel—Arkansas politician
Tennyson Guyer—U.S. Representative
Harold Jones-Quartey—Player for the Chicago Bears of the National Football League
Waylon Lowe—NCAA D-2 Wrestling Champion; current professional mixed martial arts fighter
Charlie Parker—basketball coach
Stacy Westfall—professional horse trainer
Bob Wortman—Official for NFL and NCAA basketball; only official to work 2 Super Bowls and 2 NCAA Final Fours


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website