Title: University of Mississippi School of Law
Aspects: {'U of M School of Law'}

The University of Mississippi School of Law, also known as Ole Miss Law, is an ABA-accredited law school located on the campus of the University of Mississippi in Oxford, Mississippi. The School of Law offers the only dedicated aerospace law curriculum in the United States from an ABA-accredited school. The University of Mississippi School of Law is also the only school in the United States, and one of only a handful in the world, to offer a Master of Laws (LL.M.) in Air and Space Law.The School of Law opened in 1854 and is the fourth-oldest state-supported law school in the country. Susan Duncan was hired as the new Dean in the spring of 2017.


== History ==
The University of Mississippi School of Law was founded in 1854 by the state legislature after recognizing a need for formal law instruction in the state of Mississippi. The "Department of Law," as it was then referred to, consisted of seven students and one professor. The School of Law has had seven homes over the course of its history. Classes were originally held in the Lyceum, the oldest building on the University of Mississippi campus. Shortly before the Civil War, the then-Department of Law was relocated to a building close to Oxford Square. The University agreed to lease the building in order to prevent the owner from filing from bankruptcy. This agreement lasted until the start of the Civil War in 1861 when most of the law school's students volunteered to serve in the Confederate military. When the school reopened in 1866, it was again relocated to a building that occupied the current site of Peabody Hall. The law school closed a second time in 1876, as there were no law students during the latter years of Reconstruction. In 1911, classes were moved to Ventress Hall, which was then known as Lamar Hall, named after famed Mississippian and former professor of law L.Q.C. Lamar. The "Department of Law" officially became the "School of Law" in 1921. Ten years later, the law school moved to the building now known as Farley Hall. It remained here until 1978 when it was moved to Lamar Law Center. In January 2011, the School of Law moved a sixth time to the newly constructed Robert C. Khayat Law Center.The School of Law has a faculty of 34 full-time and adjunct professors with expertise in various areas of practice. The student-faculty ratio is 18.2:1. The School of Law moved into a newly constructed building (the Robert C. Khayat Law Center) in January 2011.


== Programs ==
The law school is home to five auxiliary law programs: Center for Air and Space Law, the National Center for Justice and the Rule of Law, the Mississippi Innocence Project, the Mississippi Law Research Institute, and the Mississippi Judicial College.The law school also offers a number of clinical programs, including clinics in Child Advocacy, Criminal Appeals, Elder Law, Housing, Mediation Practicum, Legislation & Policy, Tax Practicum, Street Law, and Transactional Law. The MacArthur Justice Clinic, a branch of the program at Northwestern University School of Law, opened in the fall of 2014.


== Employment ==
According to Ole Miss' official 2016 ABA-required disclosures, 60.3% of the Class of 2016 obtained full-time, long-term, JD-required employment nine months after graduation. Ole Miss' Law School Transparency under-employment score is 18.9%, indicating the percentage of the Class of 2013 unemployed, pursuing an additional degree, or working in a non-professional, short-term, or part-time job nine months after graduation.


== Ranking ==
In 2009, National Jurist Magazine rated the University of Mississippi School of Law among the top five "best value law schools" in the United States.U.S. News ranks Ole Miss Law as tied for number 109 in the country.


== Publications ==
Mississippi Sports Law Review
Journal of Space Law
Mississippi Law Journal
University of Mississippi Business Law Forum


== Notable alumni ==
Jim Hood (JD '88), Current Attorney General of Mississippi, Democratic Candidate for Mississippi Governor in 2019.
Robert C. Khayat (Class of 1966), Former University of Mississippi Chancellor, Author, Collegiate and Professional Football Player
John Grisham (JD '81), Author
Charles Hillman Brough (Class of 1902), Governor of Arkansas
Marvin Childers (Class of c. 1986), Arkansas state Representative
Thad Cochran (JD '65), U.S. Senator for Mississippi 
Roger Wicker (JD '75), U.S. Senator for Mississippi 
Trent Lott (JD '67), Former U.S. Senator for Mississippi 
James O. Eastland (JD '25), Former U.S. Senator for Mississippi 
Gregg Harper (JD '81), U.S. Representative for Mississippi
Kenny Hulshof (JD '83), Former U.S. Representative for Missouri
Ed Bryant (JD '72), Former U.S. Representative for Tennessee and United States Federal Judge
Haley Barbour (JD '73), Former Governor of Mississippi
Ronnie Musgrove (JD '81), Former Governor of Mississippi
William A. Allain (LLB '50), Former Governor of Mississippi
William Winter (LLB '49), Former Governor of Mississippi
Cliff Finch (LLB '58), Former Governor of Mississippi 
William Waller (LLB '50), Former Governor of Mississippi 
Paul B. Johnson, Jr. (LLB '40), Former Governor of Mississippi 
Evelyn Gandy (LLB '43), Former Lieutenant Governor of Mississippi
Tim Ford (JD '77), Former Mississippi Speaker of the House
Michael P. Mills (JD '80), United States Federal Judge
Keith Starrett (JD '74), United States Federal Judge
E. Grady Jolly (LL.B '62), Federal Judge, United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Rhesa Hawkins Barksdale (JD '72), Federal Judge, United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Charles Clark (LL.B '48), Former Chief Judge, United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
William L. Waller, Jr. (JD '77), Chief Justice of the Mississippi Supreme Court 
George C. Carlson, Jr. (JD '72), Presiding Justice of the Mississippi Supreme Court
Jess H. Dickinson (JD '82), Associate Justice of the Mississippi Supreme Court
Michael K. Randolph(JD '74), Associate Justice of the Mississippi Supreme Court
Ann Hannaford Lamar (JD '82), Associate Justice of the Mississippi Supreme Court
James W. Kitchens (JD '67), Associate Justice of the Mississippi Supreme Court
Lenore Prather (JD '55), First female Mississippi Supreme Court Justice
Reuben Anderson (JD '67), First African-American Mississippi Supreme Court Justice and former Mississippi Bar President 
Patricia Jessamy (JD '74), State's Attorney for Baltimore City 
Richard Scruggs (JD '76), Trial lawyer
Christopher McDaniel (JD '97), Attorney, talk radio host, and Mississippi Senator
Boyce Holleman (JD '50), American war veteran, attorney, politician, and actor 
Rubel Phillips, Republican gubernatorial nominee in 1963 and 1967 and attorney
Charles W. Pickering (LLB '61), Former Mississippi state senator and retired U.S. District Court Judge 
Charles K. Pringle (Class of 1954), Former Mississippi Republican state representative and Biloxi lawyer 
Jim Herring (J.D., '63), Former state chairman of the Mississippi Republican Party 
Sarah Frances Hardy, Artist and author


== References ==


== External links ==

University of Mississippi School of Law