Title: University of Tirana
Aspects: {'U of T'}

The University of Tirana (Albanian: Universiteti i Tiranës) is a public university and the largest in Albania. It was originally established in 1957 as the State University of Tirana through merging of five existing institutes of higher education, the most important of which was the Institute of Sciences, founded in 1947.
The main building was planned by Italian architect, Gherardo Bosio at the beginning of 1940. It is situated at the Mother Teresa Square, south of the city center of Tirana.
The primary language of instruction is Albanian, but there are a number of faculties of Foreign Languages which are carried out in English, French, Greek, Italian, Spanish, German, Chinese and other languages.
The University of Tirana was founded in 1957 as the State University of Tirana (Albanian: Universiteti Shtetëror i Tiranës), through the merging of five existing institutes of higher education, the most important of which was the Institute of Sciences, founded in 1947. Immediately after the death of Enver Hoxha in 1985, the university was renamed the Enver Hoxha University of Tirana (Albanian: Universiteti i Tiranës Enver Hoxha) until 1992.


== Academics and size ==
The university is the largest and highest ranking university in Albania. It includes eight colleges, 50 academic departments, and 41 study programs or majors. Most programs are offered in Tirana; a few smaller affiliated campuses are located in other Albanian cities, including Saranda in the southern part of the country and Kukës in the north. It offers three-year Bachelor, one- or two-year Master, and three- to five-year doctorate degree programs, in accordance with the Bologna system.
The current campus is urban and decentralized. A new large and centralized campus has been planned in the southeast periphery of Tirana. Students dorms are grouped in a separate location called Student City (Qyteti Studenti) in southeast Tirana.UT is the biggest university in Albania, and among the biggest in Europe with 35 000 students. In 2013 the college accepted 95 new Ph.D. students. These are students in possession of bachelor's degrees.


== Faculties and Departments ==
Faculty of Social Sciences
Philosophy
Sociology
Psychology and Pedagogy
Social Work and Social Policy
Political Sciencies
Faculty of Natural Sciences
Mathematics
Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Informatics
Pharmacology
Faculty of History and Philology
History
Geography
Albanian Linguistics
Albanian Literature
Journalism
Archaeology
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Economic Sciences
Business Informatics
Finance-Accounting: The highest ranking and the most competitive department that has produced very high quality students. Many students have been very successful around the world pursuing Masters and Ph.D. degrees.
Economics
Business Administration
Marketing, Tourism
Faculty of Foreign Languages
English
French
Greek
Italian
Spanish
German
Turkish
Russian
Balkan Languages
Chinese
Department of Physical Education


== Notable professors and alumni ==
 
Sali Berisha
Odhise Grillo
Nexhmije Hoxha
Ardian Klosi
Pandeli Majko
Fatos Nano
Ismail Kadare
Jakup Mato
Laura Mersini-Houghton
Dhori Kule
Shefki Hysa


== See also ==
List of universities in Albania
Quality Assurance Agency of Higher Education
KS Studenti
Balkan Universities Network
Black Sea Universities Network


== References ==


== External links ==
University of Tirana (in Albanian)
Polytechnic University of Tirana (in Albanian)
Student City (Qyteti Studenti) (in Albanian)
University of Tirana news (in Albanian)
University of Tirana news