Title: University of Windsor
Aspects: {'U of W'}

The University of Windsor (U of W or UWindsor) is a public comprehensive and research university in Windsor, Ontario, Canada. It is Canada's southernmost university. It has approximately 12,000 full-time and part-time undergraduate students and 4,000 graduate students. Founded in 1963, the University of Windsor has graduated more than 100,000 alumni.The University of Windsor has nine faculties, including the Faculty of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, the Faculty of Education, the Faculty of Engineering, Odette School of Business, the Faculty of Graduate Studies, the Faculty of Human Kinetics, the Faculty of Law, the Faculty of Nursing, and the Faculty of Science. Through its faculties and independent schools, the university has demonstrated its primary research focuses of automotive, environmental, social justice, and international trade research. In recent years, it has increasingly begun focusing on health, natural science, and entrepreneurship research.


== History ==

The University dates to the founding of the Roman Catholic Assumption College in Windsor, Ontario in 1857. Assumption College, a primarily theological institution, was founded by the Basilian Fathers of the priestly teaching Congregation of St. Basil, in 1857. The college grew steadily, expanding its curriculum and affiliating with several other colleges over the years.In 1919, Assumption College in Windsor affiliated with the University of Western Ontario. Originally, Assumption was one of the largest colleges associated with the University of Western Ontario. Escalating costs forced Assumption University, a denominational university, to become a public institution to qualify for public support. It was granted university status in 1953.In 1950, Assumption College welcomed its first women students. In 1953, through an Act of the Ontario Legislature, Assumption College received its own university powers, and ended its affiliation with the University of Western Ontario. In 1956, the institution's name was changed to Assumption University of Windsor, by an Act of the Ontario Legislature, with Reverend Eugene Carlisle LeBel, C.S.B. named as its first President. The recently created non-denominational Essex College, led by Frank A. DeMarco, became an affiliate, with responsibility for the Pure Sciences, Applied Sciences, as well as the Schools of Business Administration and Nursing. (Essex College's Arms and Badge were registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority on March 15, 2007.)In the early 1960s, the City of Windsor's growth and demands for higher education led to further restructuring. A petition was made to the Province of Ontario for the creation of a non-denominational University of Windsor by the board of governors and regents of Assumption University and the board of directors of Essex College. The University of Windsor came into existence through its incorporation under an Act of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario on December 19, 1962. The transition from an historic Roman Catholic university to a non-denominational provincial university was an unprecedented development.On July 1, 1963, the entire campus with all of its facilities and faculty became known as the University of Windsor. As a 'federated member', Assumption University remained as an integrated institution, granting degrees only in its Faculty of Theology. Father Eugene Carlisle LeBel from Assumption became the inaugural president of the University of Windsor, and Frank A. DeMarco, who had been holding both positions of Principal, as well as Dean of Applied Science at Essex College, became the inaugural Vice President. The University's coats of arms were designed by heraldic expert Alan Beddoe.Six months later, Assumption University of Windsor made affiliation agreements with Holy Redeemer College (now Académie Sainte-Cécile), Canterbury College and the new Iona College (affiliated with the United Church of Canada). Canterbury College became the first Anglican college in the world to affiliate with a Roman Catholic University.

In 1964, when E.C. LeBel retired, Dr. John Francis Leddy was appointed President of the University of Windsor, and presided over a period of significant growth. From 1967 to 1977, Windsor grew from approximately 1,500 to 8,000 full-time students. In the 1980s and early 1990s, this growth continued. Among the new buildings erected were the Odette Business Building and the CAW Student Centre.
Enrollment reached record heights in Fall 2003 with the elimination of Grade 13 (Ontario Academic Credit) in Ontario. The university has developed a number of partnerships with local businesses and industry, such as the University of Windsor/Chrysler Canada Ltd. Automotive Research and Development Centre and Maple Leaf Sports and Entertainment.


== Academics ==
Windsor offers more than 120 majors and minors and 55 master's and doctoral degree programs across nine faculties:
Faculty of Arts, Humanities & Social ScienceArgumentation Studies; Anthrozoology; Liberal Arts and Professional Studies; Communication, Media, and Film; Creative Arts; Dramatic Art; English Language, Literature, and Creative Writing; History; Languages, Literature and Culture; Philosophy; Political Science; Psychology; Sociology, Anthropology, and Criminology; Social Work; Women's and Gender StudiesFaculty of Education
Faculty of EngineeringCivil Engineering; Electrical and Computer Engineering; Environmental Engineering; Industrial and Manufacturing and Systems Engineering; and Mechanical, Automotive, Aerospace and Materials Engineering.Odette School of BusinessAccounting, Marketing, Management, Human Resources, Finance and StrategyFaculty of Graduate Studies
Faculty of Human KineticsSport Studies, Movement Science and Sport ManagementFaculty of Law
Faculty of Nursing
Faculty of ScienceBiological Sciences, Chemistry and Biochemistry, Computer Science, Earth and Environmental Sciences, Economics, Mathematics and Statistics, Physics, General Science.University of Windsor also provides Inter-Faculty Programs offering cross-departmental majors like Forensics, Environmental studies and Arts & Science concentration.
There are nine cooperative education programs for 1,100 students.

The Faculty of Law is one of six in Ontario, and has a major teaching and research focus on Social Justice and Access to Justice issues. It publishes two law journals, the Faculty led Access to Justice and the student run, peer-reviewed Windsor Review of Legal and Social Issues.
The faculty offers a variety of courses reflecting its research focus. Law students may study Human Rights Law, Poverty Law, Aboriginal rights law and legal issues affecting women, minorities and children. There is also a strong research emphasis on criminal law, with many notable Faculty of Law professors having extensive experience both in academics and during their careers when on trial. The faculty, in conjunction with Legal Aid Ontario, runs a downtown Windsor community legal clinic called Legal Assistance Windsor staffed with supervising lawyers, law students, and social workers; it is aimed at meeting the legal needs of low-income residents and people traditionally denied access to justice. This clinic operates in all areas of law that affect those it is mandated to serve, including landlord and tenant law.
The University of Windsor runs a second legal clinic, Community Legal Aid, at the corner of Sunset and University. This clinic is a Student Legal Aid Services Society (SLASS) clinic, which is staffed primarily by volunteer law students and overseen by supervising lawyers, called review counsel. This clinic operates primarily in the areas of criminal law, landlord and tenant law, and small claims court. The clinic offers free legal services to those who qualify financially, as well as all students of the University of Windsor.
The faculty also has a joint, ABA-Approved J.D.degree program with the University of Detroit Mercy. The program is completed in three years with students taking courses at both the University of Windsor and the University of Detroit Mercy. Upon completion students earn both Canadian and American legal accreditation and can pursue licensing in any Province in Canada (aside from civil law in Quebec) and any state in the United States of America.
The University of Windsor's philosophy department is known for its work in informal logic, and regularly hosts an international argumentation conference through the Ontario Society for the Study of Argumentation. Students, faculty, and visiting researchers collaborate in the inter-departmental research group the Centre for Research in Reasoning, Argumentation, and Rhetoric. As of 2016, the University of Windsor offers an interdisciplinary PhD in Argumentation Studies, the only graduate program in North America with a focus on this field.As of 2008, the University of Windsor is also home to a satellite campus of the Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry of the University of Western Ontario.


== Campus ==

Located in Canada's traditional "automotive capital" across the border from Detroit, the campus is near the United States and its busy port of entry to and from the United States. It is framed by the Ambassador Bridge to the west and the Detroit River to the north.
The campus covers 51 hectares (130 acres) (contiguous) and is surrounded by a residential neighborhood. The campus features a small arboretum, which represents most of the species from the Carolinian forest. Campus is approximately a 10-minute drive from downtown Windsor. The University has moved some academic programs to the downtown core, including Social Work, the Executive and Professional Education program, Music and Fine Arts. Due to its historical roots in multiple religious institutions, the university's campus has many examples of Christian architecture in addition to its modern flagship buildings like the $10-million dollar Joyce Entrepreneurship Centre.The War Memorial Hall (more generally known as Memorial Hall) is a landmark building used as classrooms, labs, and offices. Memorial Hall honours alumni who had enlisted and died in the First World War, and in the Second World War. A bronze tablet remembers the alumni of Assumption College who died in the Second World War.The Joyce Entrepreneurship Centre (formerly the “Innovation Centre”) is located on the main campus, on the south side of Wyandotte street. This building houses the EPICentre, and WEtech Alliance. The EPICentre (Entrepreneurship, Practice, and Innovation Centre) is a University of Windsor organization focused on providing students and alumni with the expertise and resources necessary to pursue entrepreneurial goals. The EPICentre is part of the Ontario Centres of Excellence and provides education, mentorship, office space and varying levels of funding to help support startup business. WEtech Alliance is a similar organization, also being an Ontario Centre of Excellence, whose main focus is to support technology startup companies. They provide services to technology startups in the Windsor-Essex and Chatham-Kent regions, not exclusively to students and alumni from the University of Windsor.The CAW Student Centre is the main, comprehensive centre servicing all student needs. It houses a large food court and the main campus bookstore. Also within the CAW Centre: Student Health Services, a dental office, counselling services, a photographer, a pharmacy, the University of Windsor Students' Alliance (UWSA), a Multi-Faith Space, the campus community radio station CJAM-FM, and an information desk. A large public area beside the food court is available for clubs and informational booths to be set up on certain days. For example, during October there is a period where many Canadian law schools set up booths with representatives who answer questions and provide information to undergraduate students.
The St. Denis Centre, at the south end of campus on College Avenue, is the major athletic and recreational facility for students. It has a weight room, exercise facilities, and a swimming pool. The new South Campus Stadium built for the 2005 Pan American Junior Games is beside the St. Denis Centre - which also has dressing rooms for Lancer teams - and borders Huron Church Road, the major avenue to and from the border crossing. The athletics department has become well known for Track & Field, and Men and Women's Basketball.
In February 2018, the university announced plans to build a new athletic centre, titled the Lancer Sport and Recreation Centre. The new facility will cost $73 million and be 130,000-square-feet. Unlike the current St. Dennis Centre, there will be many separate sections of the facility to host different athletic resources; such as a new gymnasium, pool, fitness gym and many multi-purpose rooms, as opposed to a single general-purpose space. Construction for the facility began in October, 2018.In June 2019, a new research facility opened up on the campus. The new facility, called the Essex Centre of Research (or CORe) is built on to the south side of the existing Essex Hall science facility. It is an open concept 46,000-square-feet facility, featuring state-of-the-art labs and will primarily be used as a research facility.


== Library and collections ==

The Leddy Library is the main campus library for the University of Windsor. The library's collection consists of over 3 million items including electronic resources holdings of over 17,000 electronic titles and several hundred thousand data sets. The Scholarship at UWindsor institutional repository provides open access to thousands of electronic theses, dissertations, and faculty publications from the University of Windsor.
The Leddy Library is named in honour of John Francis Leddy, former president of the University of Windsor. Dr. Leddy was born in Ottawa, Ontario on April 16, 1911, but grew up in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.


== Student life ==
International students from nearly 100 countries make up approximately 23% of the student population.

Despite the large number of international students, the majority of students are domestic and come from Windsor and Essex County.Greek Life on campus is smaller at the University, but includes three International Fraternities: Delta Chi, Pi Lambda Phi and Sigma Chi; two International Sororities: Phi Sigma Sigma and Delta Zeta, and one National Sorority: Delta Alpha Theta.

All full-time undergraduate students are members of the University of Windsor Students' Alliance and possess a health and dental plan coverage as well as access to The Thirsty Scholar, a newspaper, and a radio station.
In addition to the newspaper The Lance, which is partially funded by the UWSA and provides stories written by student volunteers, student at the University of Windsor publish several independent publications. The Student Movement is a grassroots, independent, student run paper providing a critical discourse towards administration and the UWSA. The Issue is a student run electronic publication covering international social justice issues.
Leddy Library is the main campus library. The Paul Martin Law Library serves the Faculty of Law. The Canadian Auto Workers Union helped to build the CAW Student Centre which is a central meeting place for students. The University has a unique agreement with the Ambassador Duty-Free Store at Canada's busiest border crossing which provides student jobs, 400 parking spaces, and an annual cash annuity to the school.
Students also take advantage of the downtown area conveniently down the street. From restaurants to printing shops, to Bubble Tea Cafés, there are a variety of shops of interest to students.


== Residence life ==

The University houses students in four residence halls on campus.
Alumni Hall is home to Beyond First Year and First Year students (coming directly from High School). Alumni Hall has co-ed floors and it is a suite-style residence where suites have two bedrooms that share a kitchenette, and three-piece bathroom. Beyond First Year students are not assigned in the same suite as First Year students (coming directly from High School). Residence in Alumni Hall is based on grade-point average for First Year undergraduate students (coming directly from High School).
Cartier Hall is home to First Year undergraduate students (coming directly from High School). Cartier Hall has co-ed floors, two students share one room and four students share one washroom.
Laurier Hall is home to Beyond First Year students. Laurier Hall has single rooms on single gender floors.
MacDonald Hall is home to First Year undergraduate students (coming directly from High School). MacDonald has co-ed floors with double rooms and limited single rooms.


== Athletics ==

The University is represented in Canadian Interuniversity Sport by the Windsor Lancers. The Lancers play within the Ontario University Athletics conference. The University of Windsor Stadium plays host to a variety of intercollegiate sports including
Football
Soccer
Outdoor track and field
Basketball
Volleyball
Inner-tube Water-polo
Ball Hockey
European Handball
Flag Football
Table Tennis
Indoor Rugby
Windsor Lancers Ice Hockey team plays at the South Windsor Arena.


== Scholarships ==
The University joined Project Hero, a scholarship program cofounded by General (Ret'd) Rick Hillier, for the families of fallen Canadian Forces members.The University established Rosa Schreiber Award with the assistance of former University of Windsor Professor Economics, Alan A. Brown. From the University's Senate Committee on Student Awards: The competition award is open to Arts or Social Science students in Year 2 or beyond. Applicants must submit a 1,500-2,000 word essay on some aspect of moral courage. Submission must be made to the Office of Student Awards. This competition will be held in alternate years. It was established in 1995 to honour Rosa Schreiber, an Austrian Freedom Fighter who risked her life to help others during World War II.


== Administration ==
The University's President is Dr. Douglas Kneale. He took office on July 1, 2018 as the University's interim president and vice chancellor.


== Memberships ==
It is a member of the National Conference of Canadian Universities and Colleges, the University Articulation Board of Ontario, the International Association of Universities, and the Association of the British Commonwealth.  The Lance (Student Newspaper) is a member of CUP.


== Presidents ==
Eugene Carlisle LeBel, 1963–1964
John Francis Leddy, 1964–1978
Mervyn Franklin, 1978–1984
Ronald W. Ianni, 1984–1997
Ross H. Paul, 1998–2008
Alan Wildeman, 2008–2018
Douglas Kneale, 2018-2019 (interim)
Robert Gordon, 2019–present


== Notable alumni and faculty ==


=== Alumni ===
Lorne Abony, businessman
Navdeep Bains, Liberal MP for Mississauga—Malton, and Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development
James Bondy, entertainer, co-star of Ribert and Robert's Wonderworld
Joe Bowen, sportscaster, "The Voice of the Toronto Maple Leafs"
Patrick Brown, former Leader of the Opposition in Ontario and Mayor of Brampton
Warren Christie, actor
Antoni Cimolino, general director of the Stratford Festival
Joe Comuzzi, former Member of Parliament and cabinet minister
Nicole Corriero, all-time collegiate hockey record holder for most goals in a season (59 goals, tied with Mike Donnelly)
Murray Costello, retired NHL player, president of Hockey Canada, inducted into Hockey Hall of Fame, the IIHF Hall of Fame, Canada's Sports Hall of Fame, and is an Officer of the Order of Canada, and a recipient of the Order of Hockey in Canada.
Dean Del Mastro, former Member of Parliament
Drew Dilkens, mayor of Windsor, Ontario
Dwight Duncan, former Member of Provincial Parliament and former Minister of Finance
Colm Feore, actor
Eddie Francis, former mayor of Windsor, Ontario
Arjei Franklin, receiver, Winnipeg Blue Bombers, CFL
Douglas Fregin, co-founder of BlackBerry Limited
Roger Gallaway, former Member of Parliament
Mark Hominick, UFC fighter
Marie Howe, poet
Dario Hunter, the first Muslim-born person to be ordained a rabbi.
Maureen Jennings, novelist
Akshay Kumar, Bollywood actor
Thomas LaSorda, CEO of Chrysler Group
Frank Mahovlich, NHL Hall-of-Famer and Canadian Senator
Stephen Mandel, Alberta Minister of Health and former mayor of Edmonton, Alberta
Sergio Marchionne, CEO of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, Chairman of CNH Industrial and CEO of Ferrari
Brian Masse, Member of Parliament
Joe Mimran, Canadian fashion designer and entrepreneur, launched the Club Monaco and Joe Fresh brands
Thomas Moore, author
Hodan Nalayeh, media executive and entrepreneur
Rick Nicholls, Member of Provincial Parliament for Chatham-Kent—Leamington, Ontario
Rob Nicholson, Minister of National Defence of Canada
Richard Peddie, former president and CEO of Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment
Joel Quenneville, former coach of the Chicago Blackhawks of the NHL
Carlos Queiroz, professional soccer manager
John Redmond C.S.B., Basilian priest, teacher, principal, athletic director and coach at Michael Power/St. Joseph High School.
Lynsay Sands, author
Amanda Tapping, actor
Anna Maria Tremonti, CBC Radio and CBC Television reporter
Daniel Victor, musician and founder of Neverending White Lights
Tessa Virtue, ice dancer and Olympic Gold medallist
Bob Weeks, TSN golf analyst
Nigel Shawn Williams, actor
Alexander Zonjic, professional flutist
Stanley E. Zin, William R. Berkley Professor of Economics and Business, New York University, and Frisch Medal winner


=== Faculty ===
Iain Baxter&, Professor Emeritus School of Visual Arts, award-winning Canadian photographer, painter, sculptor, installation artist, and conceptual artist
Di Brandt, former Professor and poet
Alan A. Brown, Professor of Economics, founder of Omicron Delta Epsilon (ODE), international honor society in Economics
John N. Deck, former Professor, Plotinus Scholar
Craig Fleisher, Professor of Management and Windsor Research Leadership Chair, Odette School of Business, author of several key books on business and competitive intelligence
Alistair MacLeod, Author, Arts Faculty Professor, and award-winning Canadian author
Marshall McLuhan, former Professor, Canadian educator, philosopher, and scholar
Eugene McNamara, Professor Emeritus of English, writer, and poet, initiated the Creative Writing Program which has graduated a number of award-winning authors, former editor of the Windsor Review
Lakshman Marasinghe, Professor Emeritus of Law, Chairman of the Law Commission of Sri Lanka
Joyce Carol Oates, former visiting English Department Faculty member from 1968 to 1978 now at Princeton University, American Author
Howard Pawley (retired), former NDP Premier of Manitoba (1981–1988)
Ralph Simmonds, judge on the Supreme Court of Western Australia, once a professor of law at University of Windsor
Vern Stenlund, Professor of Education, Coach men's hockey, former NHL player and co-author of hockey books with Bobby Orr


== Federated or affiliated colleges ==
Assumption University, a graduate college that offers a degree in Pastoral Ministry and Religious Education
Canterbury College, a liberal arts college within the U of W with a Christian background
Iona College, a small theological college


== See also ==

List of Ontario Universities
Higher education in Ontario
Ontario Student Assistance Program
Canadian government scientific research organizations
Canadian industrial research and development organizations
Canadian Interuniversity Sport
Canadian university scientific research organizations
University of Windsor Students' Alliance


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website