Title: GoCary
Aspects: {'C-TRAN'}

GoCary is the public transportation provider in Cary, a community in the Research Triangle urbanized area in North Carolina. While the city of Raleigh provides service to most of the county via GoRaleigh, Cary opted to retain its own town-owned system. Raleigh, Durham, Chapel Hill, Cary, and Wake Forest, the five cities that constitute the region, are connected by Triangle Transit. Fixed-route service operates Monday through Saturday from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m.  As part of the GoTransit branding initiative for the Triangle, GoCary changed its name from Cary Transit or C-Tran on October 1, 2016.


== Routes ==
GoCary's fixed route bus service consists of six routes: Except for the Maynard loops, all routes terminate downtown on Hillsboro Street beside the train station where connections can also be made with Triangle Transit Routes 300X and 301, as well as Amtrak passenger rail service. GoCary also operates the Saturday Triangle Transit 300 Route from the Cary Depot to downtown Raleigh's Moore Square from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
All fixed route buses are equipped with wheelchair lifts, bike racks, GPS, automated bus stop annunciation system, and electronic fareboxes. Passengers can access real-time bus information system for all system routes by downloading the free Transloc App on their smart phones.
The Town began offering general public fixed route service in December 2005.  The Town utilizes the services of a Regional Call Center, Phone number: (919) 485-7433, to handle all inquiries about fixed route services.
In fiscal year 2014, GoCary provided 301,860 one-way passenger trips on their general public fixed route system.  Extended hours from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m. were initiated in July 2014.
GoCary also provides Door-to-Door (paratransit) transit services for senior citizens 60+ years old and persons with disabilities.  Service is provided Monday through Saturday from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.  Approximately 45,000 one-way passenger trips are provided annually on the Door to Door services.
For more information on the GoCary system, go to www.townofcary.org, click on "Services", then GoCary.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to GoCary at Wikimedia Commons