Title: Vaada (film)
Aspects: {'Vaada'}

Vaada (Hindi: वादा, translation: Promise) is a 2005 Indian Hindi psychological thriller film directed by Satish Kaushik. The film stars Arjun Rampal, Amisha Patel and Zayed Khan in lead roles. The story revolves around a murder amidst a convoluted love-triangle. It released on 7 January 2005 and is a remake of Tamil super hit Sabaash.


== Plot ==
Rahul Verma (Arjun Rampal) and Karan Srivastav (Zayed Khan) are business partners. The film begins with the discovery of the body of Pooja Sharma (Amisha Patel), Rahul's wife. Pooja has apparently committed suicide by hanging herself, however, before the postmortem can take place, her body goes missing. 
A flashback reveals that Karan used to be Pooja's ex-boyfriend. Karan was extremely possessive of Pooja, and the pair broke up after an incident where Karan stabbed a man with a fork and forced Pooja to leave her home and her father (Alok Nath).
After the break up, Karan leaves town, and Pooja meets Rahul, who is a loving and successful businessman. The pair get married, however tragedy strikes when they are involved in a car crash and Rahul loses his eyesight.
Karan has now become a wealthy businessman, and becomes partners with Rahul, unaware of who his wife is. At a meeting held in Rahuls house, Karan is shocked to learn that Rahul and Pooja are married. 
In the present, the police investigating the case begin to suspect that Pooja's death is not a suicide after all. They also believe that Karen may have been involved in the crime. Pooja's jewellery and other evidence is found at Karen's house. Karan believes that he is being framed, and enlists his friend Rajat Saxena (Rakesh Bedi) to help him prove his innocence. Karan thinks that Rahul is the most likely suspect, and sets out to confront him. The men end up in a fight, where it is revealed that Rahul has actually regained his sight and is not blind after all. Karan believes that Rahul had killed Pooja, and forces him to confess, recording the admission. However, Rahul had control of the remote for the recording device and only captured Karen's words, making it appear as if he was confessing to the murder. 
The police, lead by Inspector Khan (Rajesh Vivek), arrive at the scene. Karan is arrested for the murder and sentenced to life imprisonment and the Judge (Achyut Potdar) rules that Saxena can no longer be Karan's lawyer. 
In the holding cells, Karan manages to bribe a Constable, exchanging his watch for a tape recorder. That night, Rahul comes to meet Karan, and tells him that he knows that Karan did not kill his wife.
Rahul explains that he had found out that his blindness was curable, and secretly travelled abroad for the operation, telling his wife that he was on a business trip. He intended to surprise Pooja, but upon his arrival, he found her in Karan's arms. This infuriated him, but he kept quiet. However, later that day Pooja realised that he was no longer blind and short while after, she committed suicide.
After her death, Rahul and his servant Alex (Veerendra Saxena) found an audio cassette recorded by Pooja. In the cassette, Pooja explained that while Rahul was on his business trip, Karan came to the couple's house. Pooja threw him out after an argument, but he followed her back into the bedroom and threatened to burn the house down with her inside it, unless she renewed her relationship with him.  Pooja had no choice but to agree to divorce Rahul and then marry Karan. That night, Pooja tried to contact Rahul, but Karan caught her and told her that the stress of the situation would cause Rahul to become permanently blind. The next morning, Karan wrote up 
divorce papers for Pooja and Rahul, after which he embraced her. At that moment, Rahul returned from his trip and saw the pair.
Rahul tells Karan that Pooja did indeed commit suicide, but her death was a result of Karen's actions so he is her murderer. Rahul then explains how he vowed to get vengeance by framing Karan for the crime, so that he and his wife may finally have peace.
Karan reveals that he has finally caught Rahul, and jubilantly shows him the tape recorder. However, Rahul tells him that he had anticipated this move and says that the tape recorder has no batteries. Rahul further reveals that Saxena has been working with him the entire time and helped him with the plan. He finally walks away, leaving Karan distraught and alone in his cell. 
In the end, Rahul is seen immersing Pooja's ashes in the river.


== Cast ==
Arjun Rampal as Rahul Varma
Ameesha Patel as Pooja Sharma
Zayed Khan as Karan Srivastav
Rakesh Bedi as Advocate Saxena
Rajesh Vivek as Inspector Khan
Veerendra Saxena as Alex, Rahul's servant
Kuldeep Sharma
Anil Saxena
Achyut Potdar as Judge
Shashi Kiran as Nitin Warikoo (Oxford Bookstore Manager)
Alok Nath as  Mr. Sharma, Pooja's father
Anjana Srivastav
Sarfaraz Khan as Sufi Singer (Special Appearance in Ud Ud Ud Jaye)


== Soundtrack ==


== External links ==
Vaada on IMDb