Title: Triton X-100
Aspects: {'X100'}

Triton X-100 (C14H22O(C2H4O)n) is a nonionic surfactant that has a hydrophilic polyethylene oxide chain (on average it has 9.5 ethylene oxide units) and an aromatic hydrocarbon lipophilic or hydrophobic group. The hydrocarbon group is a 4-(1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)-phenyl group. Triton X-100 is closely related to IGEPAL CA-630 or former Nonidet P-40, which might differ from it mainly in having slightly shorter ethylene oxide chains. Thus Triton X-100 is slightly more hydrophilic than Igepal CA-630; these two detergents may not be considered to be functionally interchangeable for most applications. Triton X-100 was originally a registered trademark of Rohm & Haas Co. It was subsequently purchased by Union Carbide and then acquired by Dow Chemical Company upon the acquisition of Union Carbide. Soon afterward (in 2009), Dow also acquired Rohm & Haas Co. Other trademarks for very similar compounds include Conco NI, Dowfax 9N, Igepal CO, Makon, Neutronyx 600's, Nonipol NO, Plytergent B, Renex 600's, Solar NO, Sterox, Serfonic N, T-DET-N, Tergitol NP, Triton N, etc.Triton X detergents are distantly related to Pluronic range of detergents marketed by BASF. The pluronics are triblock copolymers of ethylene oxide and propylene oxide with the ethylene oxide segments being more hydrophilic than the propylene oxide.


== Physical properties ==
Undiluted Triton X-100 is a clear viscous fluid (less viscous than undiluted glycerol) owing to the hydrogen bonding of its hydrophilic polyethylene oxide parts. Undiluted Triton X-100 has a viscosity of about 270 centipoise at 25 °C which comes down to about 80 centipoise at 50 °C. Triton X-100 is soluble at 25 °C in water, toluene, xylene, trichloroethylene, ethylene glycol, ethyl ether, ethyl alcohol, isopropyl alcohol, and ethylene dichloride. Triton X-100 is insoluble in kerosene, mineral spirits, and naphtha, but unless a coupling agent like oleic acid is used.


== Uses ==
Triton X-100 is a commonly used detergent in laboratories. Triton X-100 is widely used to lyse cells to extract protein or organelles, or to permeabilize the membranes of living cells.Some applications include:

Industrial purpose (plating of metal)
Ingredient in influenza vaccines, including Fluzone
Permeabilizing unfixed (or lightly fixed) eukaryotic cell membranes
Solubilizing membrane proteins in their native state in conjunction with zwitterionic detergents such as CHAPS
Part of the lysis buffer (usually in a 5% solution in alkaline lysis buffer) in DNA extraction
Reducing surface tension of aqueous solutions during immunostaining (usually at a concentration of 0.1-0.5% in TBS or PBS Buffer)
Dispersion of carbon materials for soft composite materials
Restricting colony expansion in Aspergillus nidulans in microbiology
Decellularization of animal-derived tissues
Removing SDS from SDS-PAGE gels prior to renaturing the proteins within the gel
Disruption of cell monolayers as a positive control for TEER measurements
Micellar catalystApart from laboratory use, Triton X-100 can be found in several types of cleaning compounds, ranging from heavy-duty industrial products to gentle detergents. It is also a popular ingredient in homemade vinyl record cleaning fluids together with distilled water and isopropyl alcohol.


== References ==


== External links ==
Dow Triton X (other octylphenol ethoxylates) detergents
Triton X-100 on OpenWetWare biologists' wiki
Influenza Vaccines Including Triton X-100
Poly(oxy-1,2-ethanediyl), α-[4-(1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)phenyl-ω-hydroxy-] at Guidechem