Title: Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan
Aspects: {'Xavier University (disambiguation)'}

Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan is a private, Catholic university run by the Society of Jesus in Cagayan de Oro, Northern Mindanao, Philippines. Founded in 1933 as the Ateneo de Cagayan, it became a university in 1958, when it was given its present name in honor of the Jesuit missionary St. Francis Xavier.


== History ==


=== Beginnings ===
Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan was founded on June 7, 1933, as the Ateneo de Cagayan by an American Jesuit missionary, Fr. James T. G. Hayes, S.J., who later became the first Bishop and Archbishop of Cagayan de Oro. It was first located at Burgos Street by the former St. Augustine Parochial School, and began with 17 first-year high school students. Cagayan de Oro, then Cagayan de Misamis with a population of around 50,000, was a principal port and fast-growing town. The school grew with the community and opened college courses in June 1938 and grades 5 to 7 in June 1940, accommodating students from Mindanao and Visayas.


=== World War II ===
Ateneo de Cagayan moved to its present location on Corrales Avenue and grew into a college, offering courses in Liberal Arts, Education, and Commerce. On December 9, 1941, with only 614 students the school closed down and on May 2, 1942, it housed the headquarters of the Imperial Japanese Army in Mindanao. On September 9, 1944, the US bombing reduced to rubble most of Cagayan along with the school. The rector Fr. Edward J. Haggerty, S.J., was an award-winning chaplain to US forces and to the Visayas-Mindanao Force, and also advisor to Fertig's Guerrilla Government. He and his successor, Fr. Andrew F. Cervini, S.J., rebuilt the school and regular classes resumed in 1946.
After the eruption of Mt. Hibok-Hibok on August 30, 1947, the campus housed refugees from Camiguin and sponsored a boxing bout to raise funds for victims.


=== University status ===
Rector Fr. Francisco Z. Araneta, S.J., placed his efforts to achieve university status under the patronage of St. Francis Xavier, and when he succeeded he added this saint's name to the university. In 1958 it became the first university in Mindanao to receive university status, a year before its sister school Ateneo de Manila.  At the inauguration banquet Philippine President Carlos P. Garcia received the first honorary degree conferred by the university.


== Governance ==
The University is governed by a Board of Trustees with Mr. Francisco F Guerra III as Chair; Fr. Roberto C. Yap, S.J., PhD, University President since June 2011, as member. One of five Jesuit colleges and universities in the Philippines, Xavier Ateneo forms a consortium with Ateneo de Davao University and Ateneo de Zamboanga University.


== Academics ==
The school has inserted courses specifically to educate "engaged citizens and effective leaders". These would include a first-year course in Ignatian spirituality along with social exposure and reflection. A second-year course fulfills the requirement for community service experience, on a weekly basis. Also, at least four courses in theology and in philosophy are required, with Muslim students allowed to study their own religious tradition.


==== Graduate School ====
The Graduate School houses the university's post-baccalaureate programs, through doctoral studies. Its council is the Graduate School Student Council. Programs offered are:
University Academic Programs
Bachelor's Degree (Arts)

Bachelor of Arts in Economics
Bachelor of Arts in English Language
Bachelor of Arts in History
Bachelor of Arts in Interdisciplinary Studies (New program)
Bachelor of Arts in International Studies
Bachelor of Arts in Literature
Bachelor of Arts in Psychology (New program)
Bachelor of Arts in Philosophy
Bachelor of Arts in Sociology
Bachelor's Degree (Elementary Education)
Bachelor of Elementary Education (General Education)
Bachelor of Elementary Education (Preschool Education)
Bachelor of Elementary Education (Special Education)Bachelor's Degree (Law)

Bachelor of LawBachelor's Degree (Sciences)

Bachelor of Science in Accountancy
Bachelor of Science in Agribusiness
Bachelor of Science in Agricultural Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Agriculture
Bachelor of Science in Biology
Bachelor of Science in Business Administration
Bachelor of Science in Chemical Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Chemistry
Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science
Bachelor of Science in Development Communication
Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Electronics Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Food Technology
Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology (New Course)
Bachelor of Science in Information Systems
Bachelor of Science in Marine Biology
Bachelor of Science in Mathematics
Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Nursing
Bachelor of Science in Psychology
Bachelor of Science in Real Estate ManagementBachelor's Degree (Secondary Education)

Bachelor of Secondary Education (Biological Science)
Bachelor of Secondary Education (English)
Bachelor of Secondary Education (Filipino)
Bachelor of Secondary Education (Mathematics)
Bachelor of Secondary Education (Professional Education)
Bachelor of Secondary Education (Social Studies)
Bachelor of Secondary Education (Technology and Livelihood Education)
Bachelor of Secondary Education (Values Education)Post-Graduate/Doctorate Degree

Doctor in Business Management
Doctor of Medicine
Doctor of Philosophy (Education)
Doctor of Philosophy (Sociology)
Doctor of Public AdministrationMaster's degree
Professional schools


==== College of Law ====
The College of Law offers a Bachelor of Laws program. Its student council is the Association of Law Students. Its team is called Legis and its mascot is the goddess Dike (Lady Justice).
Studies are both history and research-oriented, and offer legal aid for the marginalized members of society.
On November 11, 2011, the college was named an "Outstanding Law School" by the Legal Education Board of the Supreme Court of the Philippines, and it was recognized as being one of the ten best-performing law schools in the Philippines from 2001 to 2011. A plaque was presented to its dean, Atty. Raul R. Villanueva, as outstanding law dean. On the 2015 bar exam the school ranked seventh among law-schools-with-20-examinees-or-more, and one examinee came in eighth.


==== Dr. Jose P. Rizal School of Medicine ====
FacilitiesThe Dr Jose P Rizal School of Medicine is housed in a five-storey building located at the east side of Xavier Ateneo campus. It offers health care to the community with 35 beds and by seeing about 450 out-patients per day. The Medical Library with 5,000 volumes and 256 journals is the Mindanao repository for World Health Organization publications.
Founded in 1983, the medical school has Level 1 Accredited Status from the Commission on Higher Education as a Center of Development in Medical Education, and was recognized by the Professional Regulations Commission and the Board of Medicine for having ranked second in the national Physician Licensure Examination over 11 consecutive years. The school was chosen by the Philippine Council for Health Research and Development as a satellite medical institution for its project on the development of research capabilities. In collaboration with the XU Community Health Care Center, the school was the pilot site in Mindanao for the Cervical Cancer Prevention Network Program in 2008. The research division also offers consultative services on ethical issues.


=== Undergraduate schools ===


==== College of Agriculture ====
The College of Agriculture was founded in 1954. Its student council is the Agriculture or Aggies Student Council. They are known by the monikers 'Aggies' and 'Bullriders', and its mascot is the bull. Program offerings include Agribusiness, Agricultural Engineering, Food Technology, Development Communication, and Agriculture with majors in agricultural economics, animal science, and crop science.
The College pursues an integrated program of instruction, research, extension, and production to educate students in sustainable agriculture and other relevant technologies and in equitable access to resources in the context of "global liberalization" and "grassroots people participation." Manresa Farm offers research, outreach, and production opportunities, which are supplemented by team-building and ongoing faculty development. Opportunities include immersion in communities and internships with companies and organizations.
On February 27, 2009, Commission on Higher Education (CHED) declared Xavier Ateneo Center of Development in Agriculture for three years, the first private institution given this designation. On December 2015, it was declared as a Center of Excellence in Agriculture. In November 2009, CHED declared Xavier a National Center of Excellence, specifically a Provincial Institute for Agriculture (PIA) under the National Agriculture and Fisheries Education System. As a PIA, Xavier is among the priority partners of CHED in implementing development projects in agriculture.
Xavier Ateneo qualifies for a ₱500,000 grant to fund scholarships, continuing agriculture education programs, instructional materials development, and upgrading of facilities including research laboratories, among other priority projects supported by CHED. The College has Level III PAASCU accreditation valid until May 2020. The college has produced five topnotchers and over 50 top-10 finishers on the agriculture licensure examination.


==== College of Arts and Sciences ====
The College of Arts and Sciences, with more than 160 on the faculty, offers most of the university's core subjects, e.g., Filipino, English, humanities, natural and social sciences. Its student council is the United Arts and Sciences Student Council. Its mascot is the Tiger.
Its linkages with Local Government Units sustain its Coastal Research Management and strengthen its research and extension network. The Office of International Cooperation and Networking negotiates with foreign universities for international linkages. The Arts and Sciences programs of the university are PAASCU Level IV accredited with its Literature and Biology programs declared as a CHED Center of Development. Program offerings include:


==== College of Computer Studies ====
The College of Computer Studies, founded in 2011, offers programs in Computer Science, in Information Systems and in Information Technology. Its council is the Computer Studies Student Council and its mascot the Wizard. It was included in the first batch of Centers of Development for Excellence in Information Technology Education (CODE-IT) by CHED and its BS in Computer Science received Level II accreditation from PAASCU. It strives to remain abreast of local and international standards and regulatory requirements through an ISO9001/IWA 2 "Guidelines for the Application of ISO 9001: 2000 in Education" alignment initiative.
The College Council is the computer Studies Student Council and their mascot is a Wizard.
The CCS maintains partnerships and linkages with other academic, industry, and government institutions to augment its instruction, research, and social outreach capabilities and to enhance the delivery of its curricular offerings. For instance, it has been a long-time partner and training provider of the SMART Schools/Microsoft Partners in Learning Program – a collaborative project of SMART, Microsoft, PBSP, DepEd that provides service to the community through IT training programs for public schools.


==== College of Engineering ====
The College of Engineering was founded in 1979 with 374 students and specialties in chemical, civil, electrical, and mechanical engineering. Of this first class only 51 graduated in 1984, 30 of these in civil engineering. Programs in electronics and industrial engineering were added in 1993, and the Masters in Engineering after 1995. In 2015 the pass rate ranged from 73% in electrical to 100% in mechanical engineering. All the programs are PAASCU Level II accredited and all but industrial engineering are CHED Centers of Development.The College of Engineering student council is the Association of the College of Engineering Students. Its mascot is the Warrior symbolized by Lapu-Lapu.


==== College of Nursing ====
The College of Nursing was founded in 1989 and was recognized by the Commission on Higher Education in 1992. The first batch in 1993 had a 100% passing rate in the Integrated Nurses Licensure Examination. The four-year Bachelor of Science in Nursing Program is community and prevention oriented. Students engage in basic sanitation activities in the community such as the regular free circumcisions in barangays and community fora on health issues.
From 2013 through 2016 Xavier Ateneo, with about 150 nurses per year, had a 100% passing rate on the licensure exam, and has been ranked second among large nursing schools in the Philippines.Its student council is the Council of Nursing Students, and its mascot is the Python.


==== School of Business and Management ====
The School of Business and Management (formerly 'College of Commerce') is a recognized Center of Excellence with programs in accountancy, real estate management, and business administration (majors in business economics, financial management, marketing management). The Student Entrepreneurship Program is focused on entrepreneurial values, business ethics, environmental stewardship, and corporate social responsibility.
In the 2016 CPA exam, XU ranked 6th nationwide, and from its first class in Real Estate Management 17 of 19 received a passing grade. Its Accountancy and Business & Administration programs are PAASCU Level IV re-accredited, valid until May 2019.
Its student council is the School of Business and Management Student Council. Its mascot is the Eagle. SBM is the most populous college unit in the university.


====== School of Education ======
The School of Education was founded in 1938 and reopened in 1947; it trains science, math, and English teachers. The Ignatian Pedagogical Paradigm is used in teaching. Student internships in educational institutions in the region begin as early as sophomore year. Its student council is the Teachers' Guild. Its mascot is the Phoenix.
The school holds a Level III Re-accredited Status granted by PAASCU. CHED has the School of Education as a Center of Excellence. The elementary and secondary education programs are both PAASCU Level IV re-accredited and as a Center of Training Institution for the Department of Education's Certificate and In-Service Education and Training (INSET) Programs.Programs offered are:

Elementary Education (majors in general education, pre-school education, and special education)
Secondary Education (majors in biological sciences, English, Filipino, mathematics, social studies, values education, and technology and livelihood education)
Diploma in Special Education


===== Master of Arts in Education =====
School Management
Teaching Communications Arts English
Teaching Communications Arts Filipino
Guidance & Counseling
Teaching Mathematics
Master of Arts in Educational Management (IDEA)


===== Post-Graduate/Doctorate degree =====
Doctor of Philosophy in Education


==== Andrew L Gotianun Sr Center for Integrated Technologies ====
Unlike the other colleges, the Andrew L Gotianun Sr Center for Integrated Technologies (ALGCIT – formerly Center for Industrial Technology) is a technical-vocational school. Its student council is the Center for Integrated Technologies Student Council. Its mascot is the Knight.
Students are involved in entrepreneurial and industrial work. ALGCIT is recognized by the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) and in 1999 recognized by TESDA as a Center for Excellence in Industrial Technician Education. The center offers four three-year programs based on TESDA training regulations. Students who complete the programs are eligible to take the TESDA National Certificate examinations for the qualifications embedded in each program.
The ALGCIT was housed at the main campus at Corrales Avenue until 2012 when it moved to the Jose Ch. Alvarez Technology Complex in the Manresa campus. The old ALGCIT building was renamed Faber Hall (from St. Peter Faber, co-founder of the Society of Jesus) and is used by the Colleges of Nursing and of Computer Studies. Presently, it is gearing to be the home of the Technical-Vocational track of the senior high school.


== Library ==
The University Libraries counts 14 libraries and sections in its system.

Libraries: Management and Accountancy, Current Books Collection; Agriculture; Engineering; Nursing; Computer Studies; CIT Manresa; Audio Visual Collection; Reserved Collection; General Works Collection
Professional Libraries: Law Program; Medical; Graduate Studies
Special Collections: Research and Social Outreach Collection; American Corner Collection; Fr Miguel Bernad SJ Memorabilia Collection; Judge Ernesto Melferrari's Collection; Xavieriana Collection; Thesis & Dissertation; Filipiniana and Serials Collection; Education USA Center; World Bank Knowledge Development Center
Facilities: Quiet Zone-Quiet Study Area (2nd Floor, Annex & Main Bldg); Discussion Room (5th Floor Annex Building); Internet Laboratory; Audio Visual Room 1; Audio Visual Room-CIT Manresa; Conference Room; AC Lecture Room


=== Linkages and resource sharing ===
XU Library is a member of the Jesuit Higher Education Institutions Library Consortium JHELCon, including Ateneo de Davao University, Ateneo de Manila University, Ateneo de Naga University, Ateneo de Zamboanga University, Loyola College of Culion, Loyola School of Theology, and St John Vianney Theological Seminary. Its main purpose is to use group purchasing power, as for licensing digital resources and to purchase a common library system for all members when resources become available; to provide access to and share information resources held across all the member libraries; to provide support and training for its members; and to share best practices in providing information services to its users.
The American Corner has been active and effective in providing current and useful information including but not limited to education, economics, management, business, American studies, literature, English teaching, English language, politics, law, and democratic societies.
The library participates in the Consortium of Engineering Libraries in the Philippines (CELPhi). The aim is to allow participating libraries to share resources on-line and provide better access to the shared collection at lower cost; to upgrade the professional and personal competencies of its members; to share information on professional issues, best practices, and appropriate technical services.
The library is also a member of the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, the global voice of the library and information profession and the facilitator of cooperation.
The library participates in the Directory of Open Access Journals which facilitates access to scientific and scholarly journals, also guaranteeing quality control of content.
The library participates in "Kultura link: Libraries for Culture and the Arts," a project of the National Committee on Libraries and Information Services in collaboration with the National Commission for Culture and the Arts.  It links libraries with culture and arts collections through collaborative and networking strategies among the cultural agencies and university-based libraries.
The library is also a member of the Academic Libraries Book Acquisition Systems Association, Inc, a non-profit organization that facilitates purchasing and cooperative activities among members.
The library has been a part of Academic Libraries Information Network in Mindanao since its founding in 1988 for the improvement of library services of its members, with network-wide access a key element.


== Basic education schools ==


=== Preparatory and Grade school ===
The preparatory and grade school campuses are located in Barangay Macasandig and in Pueblo de Oro.


=== Junior high school ===
Besides preparatory and grade school, the Ateneo offers secondary education. Formerly, the high school was located in the main campus at Corrales Avenue, but was relocated to a separate campus in Pueblo de Oro together with the grade school levels.


=== Senior high school ===
With the full implementation of the K-12 Basic Education Program, XU started offering Senior High School in the school year 2016–2017 with both Academic and Technical-Vocational tracks. Under the Academic Track are Accountancy and Business Management (ABM), General Academic (GA), Humanities and Social Studies (HUMSS), and Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The students enrolled in the Academic Track are housed in the Agriculture Building and Commerce Building of the main campus while the students of the Tech-Voc Track are in the Jose Chavez Alvarez Technology Complex in uptown Cagayan de Oro.


== Notable people ==
 It may be necessary to rework this list so that it complies with Wikipedia:Bio#Lists of people.


=== Alumni ===
Rufus B. Rodriguez (G.S. '67, H.S. '71, M.A. '84) – lawyer; representative, 2nd District of Cagayan de Oro (2010–2016)
Jesus Emmanuel M. Paras (G.S. '67, H.S. '71) – agriculturist; representative, 1st District of Bukidnon (2010–2013); former undersecretary for operations, Department of Agriculture
Fr. Antonio F. Moreno, S.J. (G.S. '74, H.S. '78, A.B. '82) – Provincial Superior for the Philippines, Society of Jesus; dean of Arts and Sciences and president, Ateneo de Zamboanga University (2006–2013)
Teofisto T. Guingona, Jr. (H.S. '41) – lawyer; Vice-President of the Philippines (2001–2004)
Most Rev. Honesto Ch. Pacana, S.J., D.D. (H.S. '51) – Bishop Emeritus of Malaybalay
Oscar S. Moreno (H.S. '67) – lawyer; mayor of Cagayan de Oro; governor of Misamis Oriental (2004–2013); former representative, 1st District of Misamis Oriental (1998–2004)
Nereus O. Acosta (H.S. '81) – political scientist; vice-president for Mindanao, Liberal Party; Presidential Adviser for Environmental Protection; general manager, Laguna Lake Development Authority; secretary-general, Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats; representative 1st District of Bukidnon (1998–2007)
Isabelo Lastimosa, Jr. (H.S. '82) – basketball player, Philippine Basketball Association (1988–2003)
Jose Benjamin A. Benaldo (H.S. '86) – economist; representative 1st District of Cagayan de Oro (2010–2013)
Nelbert Omolon (H.S. '97) – basketball player, Philippine Basketball Association; small forward, Air21 Express
Xavier Jesus D. Romualdo (H.S. '03) - lawyer; representative, Lone District of Camiguin
Aquilino Q. Pimentel, Jr. (A.B. '59) – lawyer; senator (1987–1992), (1998–2010); mayor of Cagayan de Oro (1980–1984); dean of Law (1962–1967)
Raul C. Rabe (A.B. '61, Ll.B. '65) – diplomat; Ambassador of the Philippines to the United States (1992–1998)
Tomas R. Osmeña (B.S. '71) – agriculturist; representative, 2nd District of Cebu City; mayor of Cebu City (1988–1995), (2001–2010)
Jesus Nicanor P. Perlas III (B.S. '72) – environmentalist; 2010 elections presidential candidate
Peter M. Unabia (B.S. '83) – agriculturist; representative, 1st District of Misamis Oriental
Carina Dayondon (B.S. '95) – mountaineer; one of the first Filipinas to reach Mt. Everest
Yevgeny Vicente B. Emano (B.S. '96) – agriculturist; governor of Misamis Oriental; representative 2nd District of Misamis Oriental (2007–2013);mayor of Tagoloan, Misamis Oriental (1998–2007)
Ziaur-Rahman Alonto Adiong (B.S. '01) – politician; assemblyman, ARMM Regional Legislative Assembly 1st District of Lanao del Sur
Alora Mae Sasam (B.S. '10) – comedian, actress; host, ASAP Chillout
Martin Andanar – journalist; host, Sapul sa Singko, Dokumentado and Andar ng mga Balita; incoming PCOO Secretary under President Rodrigo Duterte administration


=== Honoris causa ===
Carlos P. Garcia (Ll.D. '58) – lawyer; President of the Philippines (1957–1961)
Justiniano R. Borja (D.P.A. '63) – mayor of Cagayan de Oro City (1954–1964)
Eduardo Hontiveros (D.H.L. '74) – Jesuit priest; composer; composed the university hymn.
Miriam Defensor Santiago (Ll.D. '89) – lawyer; senator
Corazon C. Aquino (D.H.L. '01) – President of the Philippines (1986–1992)
Reynato Puno (Ll.D. '09) – lawyer; Chief Justice of the Supreme Court (2006–2010)
Most Rev. Orlando B. Quevedo, O.M.I., D.D. (D.H.L. '11) – Cardinal Archbishop of Cotabato
Milwilda Guevara (D.H.L. '12) – economist; undersecretary of Finance; CEO, Synergeia Foundation, Inc.
Most Rev. Luis Antonio G. Tagle, D.D. (D.H.L. '13) – Cardinal Archbishop of Manila
Corazon J. Soliman (D.H.L. '14) – social worker; Secretary of Social Welfare and Development
Teresita Quintos-Deles (D.H.L. '15) – academic; Presidential Advisor on the Peace Process
Rev. Fr. Edwin M. Gariguez (D.H.L. '16) –  environmentalist; executive secretary of the National Secretariat for Social Action, Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines; recipient, 2012 Goldman Environmental Prize
Br. Carlito M. Gaspar, C.SS.R.. (D.H.L. '17) – socio-anthropologist


=== Faculty ===
Fr. Miguel A. Bernad, S.J., PhD – professor of Literature; writer and founder, Kinaadman Journal Research Center
Most Rev. Antonio J. Ledesma, S.J., D.D. – Archbishop of Cagayan de Oro; dean of Arts and Sciences, and of Agriculture (1984–1993); director, Southeast Asia Rural Social Leadership Institute (SEARSOLIN) (1984–1993)
Fr. William F. Masterson, S.J. – president, Ateneo de Manila University (1947–1950); department chair of English; first dean of Agriculture (1953–1984); director, Southeast Asia Rural Social Leadership Institute (SEARSOLIN) (1964–1984)
Jeoffre W. Acebido – lawyer; professor of Law; 2011 Judicial Excellence Awardee
Capt. Jose Manuel C. Montalvan – World War II guerilla; ROTC instructor (1933–1937)
Jose L. Sabio, Jr. – lawyer; retired associate justice, Court of Appeals of the Philippines (1999–2009); professor of Law (1960–1999); professor emeritus of Law (1999–2012)


== Campuses ==

Xavier University operates on five campuses: 

the 8-hectare main campus in the heart of Cagayan de Oro City where the undergraduate and graduate academic units are located;
the 50-hectare Manresa Complex on the way to the airport which is used as the experimental and demonstration farms and extension works of the College of Agriculture, and as headquarters for SEARSOLIN, an outreach unit of the university; it also houses the Jose Chavez Alvarez Technology Complex of the Center for Integrated Technologies;
the 13-hectare campus in Pueblo de Oro where the grade school annex and the high school departments are located;
the grade school campus in Macasandig;
the Maria Reyna Xavier University Hospital of the College of Nursing and Jose P. Rizal School of Medicine.


== See also ==
Cagayan de Oro
SEARSOLIN
Northern Mindanao
List of Jesuit educational institutions in the Philippines
Xavier School


== References ==


== External links ==
Xavier University Official Website
Ateneo Network
Xavier University Libraries
The Crusader Publication
The Crusader Yearbook