Title: Xavier University, Bhubaneswar
Aspects: {'Xavier University (disambiguation)'}

Xavier University (XUB) is a Jesuit, Catholic university located in Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. It was authorized by the Odisha Legislative Assembly in 2013 making it the first Jesuit university in India. Xavier Institute of Management, Bhubaneswar, established by the Jesuits in 1987, is now an autonomous school under the University. The sprawling Xavier City campus which houses the university is situated at Nijigada Kurki near Jatani town in the outskirts of Bhubaneswar. The Jesuits have more than 50 colleges and several hundred educational institutes in India but this is the first university they have founded in the country.
With support from Hewlett Packard and IBM, XUB sees itself as the first fully digitized university in India.


== Mission ==
Taking its inspiration from Saint Francis Xavier, a missionary who founded the first Jesuit college in Goa, India., XUB strives to be of service to the people of Odisha and to become a globally recognized centre of learning. It is research-oriented, seeking to generate knowledge and diffuse it to create a more just society, for the benefit of all. Fifty percent of the seats are reserved for Odisha students, with a preference shown to the disadvantaged.


== Academics ==
Currently, XUB has the following schools governed by their respective strategic academic boards consisting of renowned members from respective industries as well as different leading organisations. 

Xavier Institute of Management Bhubaneswar (XIMB)
Xavier School of Rural Management (XSRM)
Xavier School of Human Resource Management (XaHR)
Xavier School of Human Settlements (XaHS)
Xavier School of Sustainability (XSOS)
Xavier School of Computer Science and Engineering (XCOMP)
Xavier School of Economics (XSE)
Xavier School of Commerce (XSC)
Xavier School of Law (XLS)
Xavier Emlyon Business School (XEBS)
School of Government and Public Affairs (SGPA)  .


=== Journals ===
Inheriting the long-standing legacy of XIMB, XUB publishes the following journals in regular intervals:
International Journal of Development and Social Research (IJDSR), published bi-annually, peer-reviewed
Vilakshan, published bi-annually, peer-reviewed
Journal of Case Research (JCR), published online bi-annually, peer-reviewed
Research World', published annually, open-access


=== Rankings ===
XUB is ranked 36th according to National Institute Ranking Framework (NIRF) by MHRD in 2018.
The Rural Management programme offered by XSRM-XUB is ranked #2 in Inida after Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad by Eduniversal best masters ranking 2019 in the Agribusiness/ Food Industry management category.


== Student Exchange Programmes ==
To foster the academic and cultural exchange of thoughts and ideas XUB engages in student and faculty exchange programmes with leading universities and institutions as mentioned below. 

University of Stellenbosch Business School (USB), Cape Town, Republic of South Africa
Skarbek Graduate School of Business Economics, Warsaw, Poland
KEDGE Business School, Bordeaux and Marseille, France
Reims Management School, Reims, France
Antwerp Management School, Antwerpen, Belgium
Fordham University, New York, USA
Sellinger School of Business and Management, Loyola College of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Facultad de Economia – IQS, Barcelona, Spain
Kyiv Investment Management Institute, Ukraine
College of Management Law & Languages, Siauliai, Lithuania
HHL-Leipzig Graduate School of Management, Leipzig, Germany
IÉSEG School of Management, Lille – Paris, France
Eastern Michigan University, Michigan, USA
Warsaw School of Economics, Warsaw, Poland


== Campus life and student activities ==
Xavier University, Bhubaneswar (XUB) has a vibrant student community living in both XIMB and Xavier City campuses. Most of the day-to-day activities starting from organising conclaves and festivals to administering canteen are run by students in both the campuses. The Xavier City campus celebrates its 3-day flagship annual cultural management festival named as Xamboree every year in the month of September-October whereas the XIMB campus celebrates Xpressoins in the month of November. Both events have attracted students and performers from across the country to celebrate the spirit of culture and education. Over the years leading performers including Badshah, Farhan Akhtar Shankar Mahadevan, Arijit Singh, Sunidhi Chauhan, Lucky Ali have performed in the annual fests making them the biggest cultural-management festivals in eastern India.   Beyond these cultural extravaganzas the student communities and committees of the university organise unique events like Gramotsava, the annual rural marketing and awareness fair in rural areas of Odisha and Prativa, the annual sports meet for underprivileged school going students of nearby villages.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website