Title: Yakeen (1969 film)
Aspects: {'Yakeen'}

Yakeen (Hindi: यक़ीन, Urdu: یقین) is a 1969 Indian film directed by Brij. The movie included stars like Dharmendra in a double role and Sharmila Tagore. They were ably supported by David, M. B. Shetty and others in the movie. Yakeen is an edge of the seat thriller with some great music by Shankar Jaikishen. Dharmendra in a double role was ravishing and both the roles suited him to the hilt. It can be said that he looked more handsome in this film and fans were in a dilemma to choose between the  two characters. The late 1960s was a huge success story for Dharmendra who was not at all affected by the Rajesh Khanna Phenomenon. In fact 1969 was the year where Dharmendra was huge Hits like Yakeen, Aaya Sawan Jhoom Ke, Pyar Hi Pyar and the unforgettable Satyakam. Director Brij was a hot property in the late sixties and the early seventies with hits like Yeh Raat Phir Nahin Aayegi, Night in London, Victoria No. 203 and Chori Mera Kaam, before his untimely death.
According to one source, the movie was a super hit at the box office reinforcing Dharmendra's star status in 1969. Sharmila Tagore appeared in a very glamorous role in the movie, though her role in Aradhana was in stark contrast the same year.


== Plot ==
Rajesh (Dharmendra) is a scientist. He is injured following instructions of Dr. Sharma in a secret experiment and granted leave. Rajesh lives with his dog, cook Bhola. He is in love with Rita (Sharmila Tagore). Rajesh goes to meet Rita and asks for her hand from her mother, who agrees. He finds his things spread on bed on returning to his hotel room. Shetty fools Bhola and takes pictures of Rajesh's house. Sharma calls him during his leave. He meets Sharma, but is surprised to know that Sharma did not call him. He and Sharma quarrel when he asks for leave to marry. Rajesh reaches office on being called by Sharma, but finds him murdered. Rajesh goes to call the police and returns with them to find the body missing. Intelligence chief Mr Roy and his assistant Mr. D'Mello ask Rajesh to take the murder blame of Sharma, so that miscreants after Sharma's research can be caught. Roy devises an escape plan for Rajesh, but it goes wrong and Rajesh is kidnapped by Shetty and taken to Mozambique. Rajesh is imprisoned and a look alike named Garson is sent to India. Garson is with blue eyes and a voice different from Rajesh's. Garson uses contact lenses and gets a throat operation to portray Rajesh's voice. His unconscious body is found in an Indian sea. Rita accepts him as Rajesh, although she has some misgivings after he touches the feet of another lady instead of Rita's mother. Rita is pregnant with Rajesh's baby. Garson is given a similar mole as Rajesh. Rajesh's dog and cook realize what has happened, so Garson kills them to avoid their exposing him. The authorities are also less trusting. The rest needs to be watched.


== Cast ==
Dharmendra... Rajesh / Garson (Dual Role)
Sharmila Tagore... Rita
David Abraham... Mr. Roy
Kamini Kaushal... Rita's Mother
Anwar Hussain... Mr. D'Mello
Asit Sen... Bhola
Brahm Bhardwaj... Dr. Sharma
Gautam Mukherjee
Vinod MehraMaster Shahid... Billu
Neelam
M.B. Shetty
Devi Chand
Harbans Singh
Sunder... Grandfather of the guy who found body at the beach
Moosa
Mukri... Father of the guy who found body at the beach
Corrina
Sherry
Deven Verma... Guy who found body at the beach (uncredited)
Alal Uddin
Helen as Night Club performer


== Soundtrack ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Yakeen on IMDb