Title: Dariga Nazarbayeva
Aspects: {'D. Nazarbayeva'}

Dariga Nursultanqyzy Nazarbayeva (Kazakh: Darıǵa Nursultanqyzy Nazarbaeva; Russian: Дарига Нурсултановна Назарбаева; born 7 May 1963) is a Kazakhstani politician who is the incumbent Chairwoman of the Senate of Kazakhstan. She is the daughter of former President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev. She was Deputy Prime Minister from 2015 to 2016.


== Life and career ==
Nazarbayeva was born at Temirtau in 1963. At one point she worked as head of the official state-run news agency, Khabar. She formed the Kazakh political party Asar, Kazakh for "All together." Asar merged with the pro-Nazarbayev party Otan in July 2006.Many analysts believe President Nazarbayev is preparing his daughter to succeed him upon his retirement or death. Her relationship with her father has deteriorated recently, in part due to the criticism of his administration she sometimes expresses.Nazarbayeva is an avid amateur opera singer. Despite a lack of formal vocal training, she often performs opera arias at concerts and events.
On 13 May 2013, she gave a concert, co-organized by Count Pierre Sheremetev, at the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées in Paris, with the Orchestre Lamoureux directed by Dmitry Yablonsky and the Sazgen sazi group directed by Baghdat Tilegenov, and with some artists as the pianist Timur Urmancheev, Sundet Baigozhin or Medet Chotabaev. Among the audience were Aleksandr Orlov, Ambassador of Russia to France, other ambassadors, diplomats or investors, and French writer Jean-Pierre Thiollet.
On 3 April 2014 Nazarbayeva was elected as Vice Chairman of the Mazhilis. On 11 September 2015 she was named Deputy Prime Minister. A year later, on 13 September 2016, she was instead appointed to the Senate; she was designated as head of the Senate's International Affairs, Defense, and Security Committee on 16 September.On June 21, 2018 it was revealed by the Panama Papers that Nazarbayeva was the sole shareholder of an off-shore sugar company based in the British Virgin Islands which did business in Kazakhstan. Her son, Nurali, was also named in the papers as being a client of Mossack Fonseca in Panama, and having two companies and luxury yacht also registered in the British Virgin Islands. According to Newsweek, "this is a sharp contradiction from Nazarbayev’s frequent appeals to entrepreneurs in the oil-rich country to pay taxes in Kazakhstan."The Panama Papers also suggest she may be the owner, through an off-shore company, of 221B Baker Street, the $183 million property famous as being the fictional address of Sherlock Holmes.According to Forbes Magazine, she was estimated in 2013 of having a wealth of $595 million. This wealth is thought to come from her current or former involvement in the companies Europe Plus Kazakhstan JSC, NTK, AlmaInvestHolding, Almatystroysnab LLP, and ALMA TV. She also founded Kazakhstan's main TV network, Khabar Agency.


== Speaker of Kazakhstan Senate ==
On the same day her father stepped down as President of Kazakhstan, Nazarbayeva was appointed Chairwoman of the Kazakhstan Senate in a unanimous secret ballot. She succeeds Kassym-Jomart Tokayev in that role, who was appointed acting president of the country. According to the New York Times, this may signal that Nazarbayeva is being groomed to become president herself.


== Family ==
Nazarbayeva had a long marriage to Kazakh businessman and politician Rakhat Aliyev until their divorce in June 2007. Aliyev held senior posts in Kazakhstan's domestic intelligence agency and foreign ministry, and later as ambassador to Austria. In 2004 a woman alleged to be Aliyev's mistress was found dead, having fallen from a tall apartment building in Beirut. He was stripped of his titles in 2007 after critiquing President Nazarbayev for altering the nation's constitution to allow him to be president for life. Aliyev claims that his divorce was executed without his consent, and that it was forced by President Nazarbayev.Aliyev was convicted in absentia for various crimes in Kazakhstan. Austria refused to extradite him, but were preparing to try him for the kidnapping and murder of two Kazakh bank officials. Before the trial Aliyev died by suicide in his Austrian jail cell.Nazarbayeva has two sons with Aliyev, Nurali and Aisoultan, and a daughter Venera. She is also a grandmother. Nurali's wife gave birth to Laura Aliyeva in 2003.


== References ==


== External links ==
Kazakh President's Daughter Chides Steel Baron Mittal
Kazakhstan: New Political Party Borrows From Western Right
Nazarbayev schmiss seine Tochter raus (German) Nazarbayev boots his daughter out.