Title: Álvaro de Bazán-class frigate
Aspects: {'F103'}

The Álvaro de Bazán class (also known as the F100 class of frigates) are a class of Aegis combat system-equipped air defence frigates in service with the Spanish Navy. The vessels were built by Spanish shipbuilder Navantia in Ferrol, with the class named for Admiral Álvaro de Bazán.  In February 2018, it was announced that a design based on the class was selected as one of five finalists for the U.S. Navy's FFG(X) program.
The ships are fitted with American Aegis weapons technology allowing them to track hundreds of airborne targets simultaneously as part of its air defence network. The F100 Álvaro de Bazán-class multi-role frigates are one of the few non-US warships to carry the Aegis Combat System and its associated AN/SPY-1 radar. Japan's Kongō class, South Korea's Sejong the Great class, the F100-derived Norwegian Fridtjof Nansen class of frigates also use the Aegis system.
The class are also the basis of the Australian Hobart-class destroyer (previously known as the "Air Warfare Destroyer"). The Australian government announced in June 2007 that, in partnership with Navantia, three F100 vessels will be built for the Royal Australian Navy (RAN) with the first due for delivery in 2014, however this was delayed until 2017 when lead ship HMAS Hobart was commissioned. She was joined in late 2018 by sister ship, HMAS Brisbane. This will be followed by HMAS Sydney in late 2019.
The Australian Government also confirmed in April 2016 that a modified F100 class was one of three vessels shortlisted to replace the Anzac-class frigates currently in service with the RAN. As of December 2017, it is one of three submitted proposals for Canada's Single Class Surface Combatant Project program. In both cases the competitor Type 26 frigate won the competition.
The Álvaro de Bazán-class frigates are the first modern vessels of the Spanish Navy to incorporate ballistic resistant steel in the hull, along with the power plants being mounted on anti-vibration mounts to reduce noise and make them less detectable by submarines. The original contract for four ships was worth €1,683m but they ended up costing €1,810m. As of 2010 it was estimated that the final vessel, F-105 would cost €834m (~US$1.1bn).


== Ships in class ==

Six ships were originally planned, including Roger de Lauria (F105) and Juan de Austria (F106). These were cancelled but a fifth ship was later added as the F105 Cristóbal Colón.


== See also ==
List of naval ship classes in service


== Similar ships ==
De Zeven Provinciën-class frigate
FREMM multipurpose frigate
Fridtjof Nansen-class frigate
Iver Huitfeldt-class frigate, Denmark
Sachsen-class frigate


== References ==


== External links ==
Armada Española
Spanish Navy page on Andrew Toppan's Haze Gray and Underway
See Armada Española Photos
Spanish Ship Joins TR Strike Group
Spain: Frigate not involved in combat
Navy unveils $11b warship contract, Australian Broadcasting Corporation, accessed 20 June 2007.