Title: Cofactor F430
Aspects: {'F430'}

F430 is the prosthetic group of the enzyme methyl coenzyme M reductase (MCR).
MCR catalyzes the release of methane in the final step of methanogenesis:

CH3–S–CoM + HS–CoB  →  CH4  +  CoB–S–S–CoMIt is found only in methanogenic Archaea and anaerobic methanotrophic Archaea.  It occurs in relatively high concentrations in archaea that are thought to be involved in reverse methanogenesis. Organisms that promote this remarkable reaction contain 7% by weight nickel protein.


== Structure ==
The structure of F430 was deduced by X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. Coenzyme F430 features the most reduced tetrapyrroles. In addition, it possesses two additional rings in comparison to the standard tetrapyrrole ring scaffold (rings A-D), with a γ-lactam ring E and a keto-containing carbocyclic ring F. It is the only natural tetrapyrrole containing nickel.  Nickel is relatively infrequent in terms of metals in biology.


== Biosynthesis ==
The biosynthesis begins with uroporphyrinogen III, the progenitor of all natural tetrapyrroles, including chlorophyll, vitamin B12, phycobilins, siroheme, heme, and heme d1. Uroporphyrinogen III is converted to sirohydrochlorin. Insertion of nickel into this tetrapyrrole is catalysed by a class II chelatase (CfbA), generating nickel(II)-sirohydrochlorin.  
An ATP-dependent amidase converts the a and c acetate side chains to acetamide, generating nickel(II)-sirohydrochlorin a,c-diamide. A two-component complex (CfbCD) carries out a 6-electron and 7-proton reduction of the ring system to generate the 15,173-seco-F430-173-acid (seco-F430) intermediate. Reduction involves ATP hydrolysis, and electrons are relayed through two 4Fe-4S centres. In the final step, an ATP-dependent  MurF-like ligase (found in peptidoglycan biosynthesis) form the final keto-containing carbocylic ring F, generating coenzyme F430. As an amine source, this reaction uses either glutamine or free ammonia.  The sequence of the two amidations is random.


== References ==