Title: G-Star Raw
Aspects: {'G star (disambiguation)'}

G-Star RAW (commonly called G-Star) is a Dutch designer clothing company, founded by Jos van Tilburg in Amsterdam in 1989, which produces urban clothing. Models for the brand include Liv Tyler, Mathias Ranegie, Girls' Generation, World Chess Champion Magnus Carlsen, Clémence Poésy and musician Sergio Pizzorno. It was showcased at the New York Fashion Week from 2008 to 2011.G-Star was originally named Gap Star but decided to change their name when going international to avoid confusion with the already established Gap. The brand specializes in making raw denim—an unwashed, untreated denim. G-Star is influenced by military clothing. Inspirations of their designs come from vintage military apparel from around the world. Some examples include special pockets constructions and the use of trims.
G-Star's flagship stores are located in New York City, Boston, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Edinburgh, Melbourne, Sydney, Shanghai, Paris, London, Cardiff, Milan, Santiago de Chile, Mumbai and the Netherlands as its home base in the most luxurious shopping street of Amsterdam, the P.C. Hooftstraat. In total, G-Star has more than 6,500 selling points worldwide.


== Brand history ==
G-Star was founded in 1989, specializing in denim clothing in the Netherlands. Jeans, shirts, and other articles of clothing were produced. In 1996, G-Star introduced raw denim jeans, which were untreated and directly from the factory.


== Collaborations ==
In February 2014, artist and music producer Pharrell Williams announced a collaboration between G-Star RAW and his textile company Bionic Yarn called "RAW for the Oceans," a collection of denim made from recycled plastic that is found in the ocean. The project was presented at the American Museum of Natural History in New York City.In 2018, artist Jaden Smith also announced a collaboration with G-Star RAW
In 2019, Formula 1 Driver Max Verstappen Announced his partnership with G-Star RAW


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
 Media related to G-Star Raw at Wikimedia Commons