Title: I Can Get It for You Wholesale (album)
Aspects: {'I Can Get It for You Wholesale (disambiguation)'}

I Can Get It for You Wholesale: Original Broadway Cast Recording contains the songs from the Broadway musical I Can Get It for You Wholesale, with music and lyrics by Harold Rome. The album contains Barbra Streisand's show-stopping solo
"Miss Marmelstein", which became the most memorable song of the show.


== Album information ==
Barbra Streisand vocals are featured in the songs "I'm Not A Well Man", "Ballard Of The Garment Trade", "Miss Marmelstein" and "What Are They Doing To Us Now?". This album marks Barbra's first professional recording and Columbia Records appearance.[1]
Goddard Lieberson, who produced the album, signed Streisand to a contract, and her first solo album The Barbra Streisand Album was released two months after I Can Get It for You Wholesale closed.
Barbra remembers in Just For The Record: "My first audition for the show was on the morning after Thanksgiving in 1961. Since the action took place in the 1930s, I showed up in a '30s fur coat that I'd bought in a thrift shop for $10. I sang three songs, including my new standby "A Sleepin' Bee." They asked me to come back and gave me "Miss Marmelstein" to learn for my second audition a few hours later."


== Track listing ==
All songs written by Harold Rome.

"Overture" – 1:27
"I'm Not A Well Man" (performed by Barbra Streisand and Jack Kruschen) – 2:21
"The Way Things Are" (performed by Elliott Gould) – 1:41
"When Gemini Meets Capricorn" (performed by Marilyn Cooper and Elliott Gould) – 2:48
"Momma, Momma, Momma" (performed by Elliott Gould and Lillian Roth) – 2:57
"The Sound Of Money" (performed by Elliott Gould and Sheree North) – 4:15
"Too Soon" (performed by Lillian Roth)  – 3:05
"The Family Way" (performed by Elliott Gould, Lillian Roth, Marilyn Cooper, Ken LeRoy and Bambi Linn) – 3:08
"Who Knows?" (performed by Marilyn Cooper) – 3:41
"Ballad Of The Garment Trade" (performed by Barbra Streisand, Elliott Gould, Marilyn Cooper, Ken LeRoy and Bambi Linn) – 3:25
"Have I Told You Lately?" (performed by Ken LeRoy and Bambi Linn) – 3:10
"A Gift Today" (performed by Elliott Gould, Lillian Roth, Marilyn Cooper, Ken LeRoy and Bambi Linn) – 3:55
"Miss Marmelstein" (performed by Barbra Streisand) – 3:22
"A Funny Thing Happened" (performed by Elliott Gould and Marilyn Cooper) – 2:38
"What's In It For Me?" (performed by Harold Lang) – 1:57
"Eat A Little Something" (performed by Elliott Gould and Lillian Roth ) – 2:10
"What Are They Doing To Us Now?" (performed by Barbra Streisand) – 7:11


== Unrecorded tracks ==
The following songs from the musical show were not included in the cast recording:

"Overture" (This unrecorded overture is a medley typical of the standard Broadway musical.  The recorded track titled "Overture" is actually a brief musical accompaniment to a piece of dance and movement that opens the first scene.)
"The Sound Of Money (Reprise)" (Harold Rome)
"Epilogue" (Harold Rome)


== Singles ==
The songs "Miss Marmelstein" (performed by Barbra Streisand) and "Who Knows?" (performed by Marilyn Cooper) were released to radio as a promotional single in April 1962.[2]


== Chart performance ==
The album peaked at #125 on Billboard's Pop Albums Chart.[3]


== Personnel ==
Produced by Goddard Lieberson
Music and lyrics by Harold Rome
Musical direction and vocal arrangements by Lehman Engel
Orchestrations by Sid Ramin
Original recording engineers: Fred Plaut and Ed Michalski