Title: Istanbul-class frigate
Aspects: {'I class'}

The Istanbul-class frigates are a planned group of four frigates for the Turkish Naval Forces. Developed under the MILGEM national warship program as the TF-100-class frigate, the Istanbul class is an enlarged variant of the Ada class anti-submarine corvette, with enhanced endurance and the fitting of a Mark 41 vertical launch system for a multi-role capability. Also known as the I-class frigate and the MILGEM-G-class frigate, the nameship of the class was cut first steel on 19 January 2017, keel laid on 3 July 2017, and is expected to commission in 2021.


== History and background ==

The Istanbul class has its origins in the Turkish MILGEM project to develop its own indigenous warships and warship building industry. The program calls for the building of a family of twelve warships, in three classes each of four ships, all with high degrees of commonality. The first of the three classes is the Ada-class anti-submarine/patrol corvette. The Istanbul class, originally known as the TF-100 class, belongs to the second of these classes and is a multi-role variant of the Ada class. The final class will be the TF2000 class, which will be the air defence member of the family.
The Istanbul class is an enlarged variant of the Ada class and will feature a slightly larger hull for improved endurance. In addition to retaining the guns, self protection and anti-submarine warfare systems of the Ada class, the Istanbul class will have twice the number of anti-ship missiles and will be equipped with the Mk.41 VLS, capable of firing RIM-66 Standard, RIM-162 ESSM and VL ASROC missiles, along with other systems for improved multi-role combat capabilities. The experience and technological know-how gained with the Istanbul class will play an important role in determining the design characteristics and the development process of the TF-2000-class frigates, as well as the selection of the systems and equipment which will be used on these significantly larger and more capable warships.

The first ship and nameship of the class, TCG Istanbul, was laid down on 19 January 2017. The fifth and largest modern warship to be both indigenously designed and built in Turkey, it is claimed that 65% of its systems will be of indigenous manufacture. Its steel cutting ceremony was attended by Turkish Defence Minister Fikri Işık and senior military officers, including Admiral Bülent Bostanoğlu, Commander of the Turkish Naval Forces.
Construction is expected to take four years and the vessel will be commissioned into service sometime in 2021.


== Ships in the class ==


== See also ==
Admiral Gorshkov-class frigate
Type 054A frigate


== References ==