Title: I Declare War (band)
Aspects: {'I Declare War'}

I Declare War is an American deathcore band from Seattle, Washington.


== History ==
The band was founded in 2005. The original line up consisted of: Johnathan Huber (Vocals), Evan Hughes (Guitar), Jake Paulson (Guitar), Randy Carpenter (Drums), and Zack Ring (Bass).
In 2006 the group released their first album, the independently released What You Deserve and began touring soon after. In 2007 the band released their second album and first on a record label, Amidst the Bloodshed on the now defunct Compton Records. During a tour in the same year, the group came in contact with fellow deathcore band Whitechapel and established a close friendship with them. In 2009 the band would experience its first major lineup change "with Chris Fugate stepping in to replace Paulson, Ryan Cox coming in for Carpenter, and Brent Eaton taking over for Ring."  This would leave Huber and Hughes as the only original members in the band. Also in 2009, the band was contacted by the up-and-coming Artery Recordings after Whitechapel guitarist Alex Wade "was approached by Artery in regards to possible bands to sign" and recommended I Declare War.The following year the band released their third album, 2010's Malevolence.  This would mark the group's last release to feature original vocalist, Jonathan Huber. He would leave the band in 2010 to further other ventures.  Huber would then go on to join death metal outfit Pathology. The band was quick to find a replacement vocalist in Jamie Hanks. Hanks had previously been the long time vocalist of death metal band Those Who Lie Beneath. In 2011, Hanks made his first recorded appearance with the band on the group's fourth record, the self-titled I Declare War. This release being titled I Declare War Guitarist Evan Hughes was the only member in the band left from the original 2005 lineup. However, even this was about to change. In early 2012, the band’s lineup again went through a drastic change. Every single member of the band other than their newly appointed vocalist left I Declare War.  With Hanks now finding himself the senior member of the band, the group gained a new lineup in 2012. This third and current incarnation of the group consists of guitarist John Winters, drummer Colin Bradford, bassist Gordon McPherson, and vocalist Jamie Hanks. They eventually expanded to once again include a second guitarist, this one being Jacob Hansen. Later on yet again due to heavy touring Hansen and Bradford would leave and enters Yusef Johnson.
In 2014, this new lineup released its first album together, We Are Violent People by Nature, which would be I Declare War’s fifth full-length album and would reach #13 on the Billboard Heatseekers chart. In 2016, 'Songs for the Sick' was released. An Instrumental version of the album was also made available.  A year later a new music video was released for one of the songs on that album entitled, Millions will Burn.  In 2018, they released a cover of the Stone Temple Pilots song Dead and Bloated.


== Band members ==

Timeline


== Discography ==
Albums

2006: What You Deserve (album, self-released)
2007: Amidst the Bloodshed (album, Compton Records)
2010: Malevolence (album, Artery Recordings)
2011: I Declare War (album, Artery Recordings) U.S. Heatseekers #16
2014: We Are Violent People by Nature (album, Artery Recordings) U.S. Heatseekers #13
2016: Songs for the Sick (album, self-released)Other

2007: Bring the Season (Christmas-themed EP, Compton Records)
2019: Downcast (EP: Not On Label)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website