Title: Where Is My Heart?
Aspects: {'I Hate You'}

Where is my Heart? is a platform video game developed by Danish studios Schulenburg Software and Die Gute Fabrik. It was released as a PlayStation mini on the PlayStation Network in North America on November 8, 2011 and Europe on November 16, 2011.
On March 2, 2012, Die Gute Fabrik announced plans to release the game for Windows, macOS, and Linux in the spring of 2012, a date which was pushed back, eventually seeing the Windows and macOS versions released on May 29, 2014, with the Linux version "still on the way…".


== Story ==
Where is my Heart? tells the story of a family of three monsters who find themselves lost in the forest after setting out to find their home (a tree) after it mysteriously floats away one day. Elements of familial struggle and working together are sprinkled throughout.


== Gameplay ==

The game starts out as any platformer might, but soon the image breaks into frames of varying sizes, often shuffling them. The player must then try to navigate their way through the level, by piecing together where their character appears to be in any given frame, as well as collecting hearts or figuring out other puzzles that might feature in a level. The player is able to switch between one of the three monster characters at will, each of them having a special ability that can aid in solving a level.


== Development ==
The idea for the game was derived from Die Gute Fabrik designer Bernhard Schulenburg's memories of being lost in the woods as a child while on a hike with his parents.  The game is also an homage to platformers of the 1980s and '90s, and its story and art direction are inspired by "German fairytales, the mythical creatures of Central Europe, and Japanese pictogram aesthetics."


== Reception ==
Reviews of Where is my Heart? have been generally favorable, with a Metacritic score of 81 out of 100.GameZone reviewer David Sanchez gave applause to the gameplay and art direction, proclaiming Where is my Heart? "...a wonderful experience that's both a work of art and proper homage to classic game design...one of the most genius gameplay formats seen in a platformer in a long time."
Brendon Keogh of Edge praised the ingenuity in the separated frames mechanic, stating, "A less skilled developer could easily abuse such a novel device, but the restrained, careful design of Where is my Heart? ensures the game lasts just long enough to get the most out of its mechanic without succumbing to padding."  Christian Donlan of Eurogamer also commended the design as "...a concept so ingenious, I'm stunned I've never seen it before."Conversely, David Wolinsky of The A.V. Club found the game interesting but somewhat repetitive, saying, "A bit one-note. It's an incredibly interesting note, but still, there isn't much variation as you work your way through all 26 levels."  
The major complaint of IGN's Ryan Clements was simply that the game's play-through time is too short, recommending the game with a caveat: "Play it for something a little different, even if the experience doesn't last longer than a few hours."


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site
Where is my Heart? developer page