Title: I Love Trouble (1948 film)
Aspects: {'I Love Trouble'}

I Love Trouble is a 1948 American film noir mystery film written by Roy Huggins from his first novel The Double Take, directed by S. Sylvan Simon, and starring Franchot Tone as Stuart Bailey.  The character of Stuart Bailey was later portrayed by Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. in the television series 77 Sunset Strip.


== Plot ==
A wealthy politician, Ralph Johnston, hires detective Stuart Bailey to investigate his missing wife's background. Bailey discovers that the wife had been a dancer under her maiden name of Jane Breeger and had left her Oregon home town with Buster Buffin, a nightclub entertainer, who says Jane changed her name to Janie Joy and enrolled at UCLA. Buffin is killed before Bailey can question him further.
Norma Shannon shows up, looking for her sister Jane, but when Bailey shows her a photograph of the missing woman, Norma says it's not her. Bailey learns that the wife had used stolen papers from a girlfriend to enter college after she stole $40,000 from the club where she worked, owned by a man named Keller.
The detective eventually learns that Johnston had killed his wife when he had himself discovered her past, in order to avoid a scandal, and that he had hired the detective in order to frame him for the killing.


== Cast ==
Franchot Tone as Stuart Bailey
Janet Blair as Norma Shannon
Janis Carter as Mrs. Caprillo aka Jane Breeger aka Janie Joy
Adele Jergens as Boots Nestor
Glenda Farrell as Hazel Bixby
Steven Geray as Keller
Tom Powers as Ralph Johnston
Lynn Merrick as Mrs. Johnston
John Ireland as Reno
Eduardo Ciannelli as John Vega Caprillo
Robert Barrat as Lt. Quint
Raymond Burr as Herb
Arthur Space as Sgt. Muller


== Production ==
The novel and film were written by Roy Huggins, and is laced with a comedic sophistication evident in his subsequent work. In Huggins' Archive of American Television interview, he notes that I Love Trouble was somehow lost and had not been seen anywhere for decades and never run on television, but the film has since been found and screened in venues such as the Museum of Modern Art in New York City. Huggins later created numerous landmark television series such as Maverick starring James Garner, The Fugitive starring David Janssen, The Rockford Files starring Garner, and 77 Sunset Strip starring Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. as Stuart Bailey. I Love Trouble was Huggins' first brush with making narrative film.


== References ==


== External links ==
I Love Trouble on IMDb
I Love Trouble is available for free download at the Internet Archive
I Love Trouble at the TCM Movie Database
I Love Trouble at AllMovie
I Love Trouble at Film Noir