Title: Tuborg Brewery
Aspects: {'J-Day'}

Tuborg is a Danish brewing company founded in 1873 on a harbour in Hellerup, an area North of Copenhagen, Denmark. Since 1970 it has been part of the Carlsberg Group. The brewery's flagship, Tuborg, pilsner was brewed for the first time in 1880.


== History ==
The name Tuborg comes from Thuesborg ("Thue's castle"), a Copenhagen inn from the 1690s situated in the area of the brewery. This evolved and was adopted into local placenames, such as Lille Tuborg and Store Tuborg. "Tuborgvej" street in Copenhagen is named after the site of the original Tuborg brewery.
Tuborg initially produced pale lager for the Danish market. It merged with United Breweries in 1894, which then entered into a profit-sharing agreement with Carlsberg in 1903. In 1970, United Breweries was acquired by Carlsberg.Today, it makes lager for global export, as well as a variety of continental styles for both domestic and foreign markets.
In 1996 the last Tuborg beer was brewed in Hellerup and the area is now providing fashionable apartments, houses and business offices.


== Beers ==

Tuborg sell a variety of beers in over 31 countries. These varieties include Tuborg Green, Tuborg Lemon, Tuborg Christmas beer, Tuborg Gold, Tuborg Red, Tuborg Twist, Tuborg Black, and  Tuborg Fine Festival. (Tuborg Fine Festival has a higher percentage of alcohol.) 
Tuborg Gold is quite popular throughout Denmark and southern Sweden, being as easily found on store shelves in Denmark and in the Swedish State Alcohol Monopoly together with Swedish brews such as Pripps Blå or Falcon. Tuborg Green has been extremely successful in Eastern Europe, especially in Russia, where the brand has seen double digit growth for a number of years and is now the largest premium international beer in the country.
Tuborg Red was the first beer brewed by the company, in 1875. Tuborg Red is not brewed regularly but is produced once each May to salute the company's birthday.In its native country of Denmark, Tuborg is also known for additional brands, including Tuborg Red, and various soft drinks, including orange-flavoured Tuborg Squash.


== Promotions ==

In 1990 Tuborg launched their annual Christmas brew on the second Wednesday in November, with the marketing term "J-day"; "snestorm" (blizzard) and "snefald" (snowfall) are also used. 'J' stands for Jul (Christmas) or julebryg (Christmas brew). Similarly, there is a P-day for påskebryg (Easter brew). In 1999, J-day moved to the first Friday in November. Traffic police laid out an alcohol control plan for that evening. In 2009 J-day was moved again to the last Friday in October, but in 2010 it returned to the first Friday in November.
In 2008, Tuborg announced a sponsorship deal with Reading and Leeds music festivals to become their exclusive Official Beer Partner, a position held in previous years by Carling. In 2009, it also arranged an exclusive deal with The Download festival to be the official beer and have a dedicated stage named after the beer.Tuborg also sponsors the Tuborg Image Awards, an annual music award presentation that takes place in Nepal.Part of the brand's success in Russia has come from its strong links to music in Eastern Europe (see also Tuborg GreenFest) and by being one of the first beers in the market to launch the innovative ring pull cap.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website