Title: K Ingleside
Aspects: {'K/T line', 'K-line'}

The K Ingleside is a Muni Metro line in San Francisco, California, mainly serving the West Portal and Ingleside neighborhoods. Opened on February 3, 1918, it was the first line to use the Twin Peaks Tunnel.


== Route description ==

The line runs from the Embarcadero Station downtown to the Geneva Avenue and San Jose Avenue in the Balboa Park neighborhood, near City College of San Francisco. The downtown portion of the line runs through the Market Street Subway, which it shares with the four other Muni Metro lines. It continues through the much older Twin Peaks Tunnel, along with the L Taraval and M Ocean View lines, emerging at West Portal Station. From there, it follows West Portal Avenue to Saint Francis Circle, where it then runs on its own right-of-way in the middle of Junipero Serra Boulevard to Ocean Avenue. The K then follows Ocean Avenue until it reaches Balboa Park Station, where it circles around the Metro yard at San Jose and Geneva Avenue, with the actual terminal stop alongside the station.
The K Ingleside line stops at large stations for the downtown section of the line and at smaller stops on the rest of the line. Most of the smaller stops are nothing more than concrete "islands" in the middle of the street next to the tracks. Some of these "island" stops provide access for wheelchairs. Muni bus routes provide service to all stations and other systems with access to the stations are noted.
The K Ingleside begins service at 5 a.m. weekdays, 6 a.m. Saturdays and 8 a.m. Sundays, with the end of service occurring around 12:30 a.m. each night.  It operates a headway of 9 to 10 minutes during the day, and 12 to 15 minutes at night. Late night service is provided by the 91 Owl diesel bus line on West Portal and Ocean Avenue, and by the L-Owl diesel bus line from West Portal Station to Market Street and Steuart Street, near Embarcadero Station. There is also a K-Owl diesel bus line that runs from Market Street and Steuart Street to Balboa Park. This line makes a limited number of trips between the times owl service stops and the underground subway stations open.


== History ==


=== Market Street Railway ===
The Market Street Railway opened a branch – built in just six days – of its Mission Street line along Ocean Avenue to Victoria Street on December 4, 1895 to serve the new Ingleside Racetrack. The line was extended to the Ingleside House (where Ocean Avenue now meets Junipero Serra Boulevard) shortly thereafter. The 1906 earthquake damaged many cable car and streetcar lines; in the aftermath, the United Railroads (URR) – successor to the Market Street Railway – closed many cable cars lines and expanded the electric streetcar system. The URR resumed service on the Ocean Avenue line on May 6, 1906; the line (route 12) was soon extended to Ocean Beach via Junipero Serra Boulevard and Sloat Boulevard.


=== Municipal Railway ===

The San Francisco Municipal Railway (Muni) opened its K line along with the Twin Peaks Tunnel on February 3, 1918. The line originally ran from St. Francis Circle station along West Portal Avenue, through the tunnel, along Market Street to Van Ness Avenue (joining the J Church at Church Street), and along existing tracks on Van Ness Avenue to Pine Street. On June 1, 1918, the J and K lines were removed from Van Ness Avenue and extended along Market Street to a loop at the Ferry Building.The existing URR streetcar service on Ocean Avenue formed a barrier to continued Muni expansion into the Ingleside district. On November 25, 1918, the city and the private URR signed the "Parkside Agreements", which allowed Muni streetcars to use URR trackage on Ocean Avenue as far as Harold Avenue, as well as on Taraval Street, in exchange for a cash payment and shared maintenance costs. The K Ingleside line was extended south on Junipero Serra Boulevard and east on Ocean Avenue to Miramar Avenue on February 21, 1919. On May 18, it was extended several blocks further east to Brighton Avenue, then two blocks south on Grafton to a stub-end terminal at Grafton Avenue.Every other inbound car on Sundays and holidays continued onto the L Taraval line (rather than to downtown) beginning on April 13, 1919; this ended on October 21, 1923, when the L Taraval line was extended to downtown at all times. Every other inbound car operated to the new East Bay Terminal beginning on January 15, 1939; all cars ran there starting on January 1, 1941. Muni bought the Market Street Railway (ex-URR) in 1944; route 12 service was removed from Ocean Avenue on April 8, 1945, leaving just the K Ingleside. On April 21, every other outbound K car was extended on Ocean Avenue and Onondaga Street to Mission Street, providing a direct connection to route 14.On January 21, 1951, the 48 crosstown route replaced streetcars on the K and L lines on evenings and holidays. All-rail service returned on May 18, 1952, at which time the trackage on Brighton Avenue was abandoned and replaced with the Phelan Loop at Phelan Avenue near City College. Service past the loop to Mission ended on October 10, 1952, although trackage as far as San Jose Avenue was kept for non-revenue moves to the carhouse.


=== Muni Metro ===
Service was diverted to Duboce Avenue, Church Street, and 17th Street on December 2, 1972, due to construction of the Market Street Subway. On April 23, 1979, the line was lengthened to Balboa Park BART Station. Initially, only supplemental trips running from West Portal and using newly-in-service Boeing Light Rail Vehicles (LRVs) served the new extension, weekdays only, and most K-line service continued to use PCC streetcars running from downtown to Phelan Loop. The LRV shuttle service ended in February 1980, and PCC-operated service was extended to Balboa Park, but lasted only four months before the weekday service was replaced by a temporary K-L crosstown route using LRVs (and weekend service cut back to Phelan Loop). Additional changes to the service configuration followed until finally on December 17, 1980, the K line became operated as a through service from Embarcadero Station to Balboa Park, using LRVs, on weekdays only.  Weekend service continued to use PCC cars until September 1982 when the Muni Metro became fully operational.
From February 2001 to June 7, 2003, K Ingleside service was cut back to St. Francis Circle and replaced by buses on Ocean Avenue for the Ocean Avenue Reconstruction and Improvement Project, a major street repaving and utility replacement project. The Muni tracks and overhead power system were replaced, boarding islands were reconstructed, and accessible platforms built at Ocean and Lee.Following service changes on June 30, 2007, the K Ingleside and the T Third Street lines were spliced together inside the Market Street Subway tunnel, though keeping their respective line designations, resulting in an upside-down horseshoe-shaped route from Balboa Park to Bayshore and Sunnydale. At West Portal Station, inbound K trains heading towards downtown change their signs to the T line; conversely, at Embarcadero Station, T trains heading into downtown change signs to the K line. The trains show the ultimate destination of the spliced lines rather than the intermediate "terminus" of the individual line.
Service on the line was modified from June 25 to August 24, 2018 due to the Twin Peaks Tunnel shutdown. The underground section of the line was closed west of Castro station, while the surface section was through-routed with the J Church line. On August 25, 2018, at the conclusion of the shutdown, Muni began running permanently two-car trains on the K/T line (as had been used east of Castro during the shutdown). Because of insufficiently-long boarding islands, the rear car is closed on the Ocean Avenue section of the line. Passengers in the rear car on outbound trains will be forced to move to the front car at Junipero Serra and Ocean station, and inbound K trains will not open the rear car to passengers until passing Junipero Serra and Ocean.


=== Future plans ===
Future plans for the K line include an extension on Geneva Avenue from the Balboa Park station to Bayshore Boulevard, with a connection to the T Third Street line and a possible connection to the Bayshore Caltrain station in Brisbane. This has been identified as a Tier 1 level project.
Additional plans include a subway with a portal entrance south of Saint Francis Circle on Junipero Serra Boulevard that connects to the existing Twin Peaks Tunnel. This plan will coincide with the construction of the M Ocean View subway project.


== Station and stop listing ==


== References ==


== External links ==
SFMTA – K Ingleside/T Third Street