Title: Traffic Ramaswamy
Aspects: {'K. R. Ramasamy'}

K. R. Ramaswamy (born 1934), referred to by the media as Traffic Ramaswamy, is an Indian public interest litigator and social activist from Chennai, Tamil Nadu. He is a former mill worker, a founder member of Tamil Nadu's Home Guard, and a self-appointed traffic policeman. 
Much of his activism relates to regulating traffic in Chennai and filing PIL in court. Initially he started unofficially directing traffic at the city's busy Parrys Corner. The local police were pleased with his efforts and provided him with an official identity card. He acquired the nickname Traffic Ramaswamy after that.He has brought many public interest lawsuits in the Madras High Court as well as Supreme Court of India. In 2007, he was attacked by his opponents' lawyers on the steps of the courthouse. This was not the first time, he has been attacked: in 2002, he was assaulted by fish sellers, after he obtained a ban on the use of motorised fish carts, damaging his sight and his family have disowned him. He has also had his office ransacked and papers were stolen. However, helped by donations from friends and public he claims he will continue his fight to make Chennai the most livable and lovable city. his Advocate Mr. S. Ganesan helping him to filing PIL case from 2007.
His activism have resulted in the demolition of many illegally constructed buildings in Chennai, restrictions on motorised fish carts, de-congestion of major bus routes by banning auto rickshaws from them, and a review of lavish state funding for a feature film (arguing the money could be more properly used for development work). He is now accompanied day and night by an armed police bodyguard appointed by the Madras High Court.His work regarding removal and banning of illegally placed hoardings received renewed public interest in September 2019 following the tragic accident of Chennai-based engineer Subasri. She had been travelling on her two wheeler donning a helmet to her house after work when an illegally placed banner fell from a height of approximately 15 feet directly in front of her two wheeler causing her to lose control and fall to the ground and be crushed by a water tanker lorry coming behind her which was unable to halt in time.


== Popular culture ==
A biopic titled Traffic Ramasamy on the life of Traffic Ramaswamy was directed by debutant Vicky in which father of Vijay and ace director S. A. Chandrasekhar had done the titular role.


== References ==


== Other links ==
Chennai Best, "Battling for the Cause of Chennai Citizens" Retrieved: 9 July 2007
The Hindu, 27 Nov 2006 Online edition of India's National Newspaper Retrieved: 10 July 2007
IBN Live,, 23 January 2007, "This 73-yr-old is largest PIL filer"