Title: Kaali – Ek Punar Avatar
Aspects: {'Kaali'}

Kaali – Ek Punar Avatar is an Indian soap opera which aired on Star Plus from 3 December 2012 to 8 March 2013. The story was based on the famous Nitish Katara murder case where a mother fights and gets justice for her son.


== Overview ==
Nimai and Sayali love each other but Sayali's dad Rajan Tyagi and her brother Samar Tyagi don't want Sayali to get married to a middle-class family so they kill him and say that he committed suicide. Later they accuse the Late Nimai of killing Keshav, But Nimai's mum Vaani finds out that Samar Tyagi killed her son and decides to get justice for her son. Later comes Dev who has come to protect Vaani and her family. Sayali runs away from home and a lawyer Rajneesh Patak finds Sayali and takes her home. When Rajan Tyagi finds out that Rajneesh is a lawyer he asks him to fight for his case and marry Sayali, Sayali and Rajneesh get engaged. Samar gets arrested by Dev and Rajan says to Rajneesh if he doesn't bail his son and win the case he'll kill his mum. Later on in the show Rajneesh decides that he doesn't was to fight the case for Rajan Tyagi. Later Rajneesh's mum is in Rajan Tyagi's custody. They all go to court and Rajneesh is scared to say anything against Rajan because he's scared that he'll harm his mum. But then remembers what his mum said to him and decides to go against Rajan. He shows the court a video in which Rajan and Samar have confessed everything and Sayali rescues Rajneesh's mum, Rajan and Samar go to jail. The show ends with Sayali and Rajneesh getting married and Paakhi (Vaani's daughter) and Dev fall in love and are going out with each other.


== Cast ==
Arjun Bijlani as Dev, Paakhi's Love Interest
Sonali Nikam as Sayali Tyagi/Sayali Patak, Rajan's Daughter, Rajneesh's Wife
Unknown as Advocate Rajneesh Patak, Rajan's Lawyer, Sayali's Husband
Anshul Trivedi as Nimai, Sayali's Ex-Lover (Dead)
Aneri Vajani as Paakhi, Nimai's Sister, Dev's Love Interest
Mangal Kenkre as Vaani, Nimai & Paakhi's Mother
Deepak Wadhwa as Samar Tyagi, Sayali's Brother, Rajan's Son, Nimai's Murderer
Sudhir Nimai as Rajan Tyagi, Sayali & Samar's Father


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website