Title: Keep America Beautiful
Aspects: {'KAB'}

Keep America Beautiful is a Stamford, Connecticut-based nonprofit organization founded in 1953. It is the largest community improvement organization in the United States, with more than 600 state and community-based affiliate organizations and more than 1,000 partner organizations.   
Keep America Beautiful says that it aims to end littering, to improve recycling, and to beautify American communities.


== Criticism ==
Heather Rogers, creator of the 2005 documentary film Gone Tomorrow: The Hidden Life of Garbage and book of the same name, classifies Keep America Beautiful as one of the first greenwashing corporate fronts, alleging that the group was created in response to Vermont's 1953 attempt to legislate a mandatory deposit to be paid at point of purchase on disposable beverage containers and banning the sale of beer in non-refillable bottles.The Keep America Beautiful narrow focus on litter, and indeed construction of the modern concept of litter, is seen as an attempt to divert responsibility from industries that manufacture and sell disposable products to the consumer that improperly disposes of the related non-returnable wrappers, filters, and beverage containers.Elizabeth Royte author of Garbage Land, describes Keep America Beautiful as a "masterful example of corporate greenwash", writing that in contrast to its anti-litter campaigns, it ignores the potential of recycling legislation and resists changes to packaging.The tobacco industry developed programs with Keep America Beautiful that focused on cigarette litter solutions acceptable to the tobacco industry such as volunteer clean-ups and ashtrays, instead of smokefree policies at parks and beaches.  The tobacco industry has funded Keep America Beautiful  and similar organizations internationally.


== History ==
Keep America Beautiful was founded in December 1953 by a group of American businesses (including companies such as American Can Company, Continental Can Company, Owens-Illinois Glass Co.), nonprofit organizations (Izaak Walton League of America, National Council of State Garden Clubs, U.S. Brewers Foundation), government agencies (Connecticut State Highway Dept., N.Y. State Department of Public Works), and concerned individuals in reaction to the growing problem of highway litter that followed the construction of the Interstate Highway System, and an increasingly mobile and convenience-oriented American consumer. The original goal of the organization was to reduce litter through public education, including public service announcement (PSA) campaigns, and engage tri-sector partnerships through the support of industry, government and nonprofits.
Keep America Beautiful conducted many local PSA campaigns early in its history. One of these early campaigns in Pennsylvania (PENNDOT) some attribute to having coined the term "litterbug," although the National Council of State Garden Clubs representative exhibited a "litter bug" emblem at the first Keep America Beautiful organizational meeting. Others report, however, that the term was coined by Paul B. Gioni, a copywriter in New York City who originated it for the Advertising Council, known as the Ad Council, in 1947. Keep America Beautiful joined with the Ad Council in 1961 to dramatize the idea that every individual must help protect against the effects litter has on the environment.. Gioni came up with the popular television campaign theme in 1963, "Every Litter Bit Hurts." Another campaign in 1964 featured the character Susan Spotless.
In 1970, Keep America Beautiful began distributing a free brochure. More than 100,000 copies of the brochure were requested within four months.
In 1971, a new campaign was launched on Earth Day with the theme, "People Start Pollution. People Can Stop It." In what became known as the "Crying Indian" PSA, the television ad, narrated by actor William Conrad, featured actor Iron Eyes Cody, who portrayed a Native American man devastated to see the destruction of the earth's natural beauty caused by the thoughtless pollution and litter of a modern society.In 1975, Keep America Beautiful introduced its "Clean Community System," which encouraged local communities to prevent litter through education efforts, public service advertising, local research, mapping of litter "hotspots," and cleanup activities. During the height of the campaign, it received over 2,000 letters a month from people wanting to join their local programs. The "Clean Community System" evolved into Keep America Beautiful's current network of roughly 600 state and community-based affiliates nationwide. 
In 1999, Keep America Beautiful introduced an annual "Great American Cleanup" campaign. The national spring cleanup focuses on local efforts at beautification. Volunteers organize to remove litter and debris from roadsides, highways, shorelines and waterways; plant trees, flowers and community gardens; clean and restore nature trails, recreation areas and playgrounds; recycle aluminum cans, plastic bottles, electronics, paper products, scrap tires, and clothing; rebuild public spaces in communities struck by natural disasters; and much more.
In 2018, the 65th anniversary of Keep America Beautiful, the nonprofit reintroduced itself to America with a new PSA – “Let’s Talk About America” – which has been aired more than 115,000 times and received more than 1 billion media impressions to date.


== Accomplishments ==
Keep America Beautiful is a highly-rated nonprofit, achieving 4-star (top) ranking by independent organization Charity Navigator, earning a 2018 Gold Seal of Transparency on GuideStar, and receiving a Charity-Watch Top-Rated Charity designation.
The organization is best known historically for the "Crying Indian" public service advertisement (PSA) which launched on Earth Day in 1971. This advertising campaign has been widely credited, including in Frank Lowenstein's "Voices of Protest" with inspiring America's fledgling environmental movement.
Keep America Beautiful was the first organization to bring littering to national attention. It made "litterbug” a household word.
In 2018, the Great American Cleanup, the nation's largest community improvement program, celebrated its 20th year. Keep America Beautiful, along with network of affiliates and partner organizations, engaged volunteers across the country who logged 9.4 million volunteer hours in helping to clean public spaces; improve and beautify roads, shorelines and waterways; and plant trees, flowers, and gardens. In total, 24.7 million pounds of litter and 68 million pounds of recyclables were collected.


== Mission ==
To inspire and educate people to take action every day to improve and beautify their community environment.


== Focus areas ==
End littering
Improve recycling
Beautify communities


== Programs ==


=== Great American Cleanup ===
The Great American Cleanup, the nation's largest community improvement program, takes place annually during the spring months March through June, involving millions of volunteers and participants. Volunteer activities include litter and illegal dumpsite cleanups, park and trail maintenance, recycling collections, tree plantings, community gardening, educational programs, and litter-free events.


=== America Recycles Day ===
America Recycles Day, a Keep America Beautiful program, takes place each year on and around November 15, and is the only nationally recognized day and community-driven awareness event dedicated to promoting and celebrating recycling in the United States. 
Nationally, thousands of organizations hold events to educate people about recycling resources in their community. Through recycling collection drives, demonstrations, competitions, tours, displays and other awareness-raising events, citizens are encouraged to increase their recycling at home, at school, in the office and in the community at-large.


=== Cigarette Litter Prevention Program ===
The Cigarette Litter Prevention Program (CLPP), created by Keep America Beautiful in 2002, is the nation's largest program aimed at eliminating cigarette litter. Since its inception, the program has been successfully implemented in more than 1,700 communities nationwide. Throughout its history, the CLPP has helped reduce cigarette litter in the communities in which it has been implemented by an average of 50 percent. Recognizing the presence of ash receptacles correlates with lower rates of cigarette butt littering, Keep America Beautiful has placed 10,000 litter stands in public settings through 2019. 


=== Community Restoration and Resiliency ===
The Keep America Beautiful Community Restoration and Resiliency Fund (CRRF) was launched in 2017 after Hurricane Harvey’s historic flooding in Texas and Louisiana and prior to Hurricane Irma coming ashore in Florida. Managed and administered by Keep America Beautiful, the fund provides long-term support in the form of grants to rebuild vital public spaces: parks, greenways, community gateways, Main Street/downtown areas, open spaces and more. For generations, Keep America Beautiful and its affiliates have supported critical public space restoration projects that help remedy property damaged or destroyed by natural disasters.


=== Plogging ===
Plogging, the act of picking up litter while jogging, debuted in Sweden in 2016 and was adopted by Keep America Beautiful in 2018 as it incorporates reducing litter, improving recycling, and beautifying communities – the three primary areas of work that Keep America Beautiful and its network of more than 600 community-based affiliates focus on. In 2019, Keep America Beautiful hosted its inaugural Trash Dash, a 5K plogging event in Connecticut, which resulted in the collection of more than 700 pounds of litter and recyclables. 


=== Youth and Education ===
Education and behavior change are the cornerstones of Keep America Beautiful. KAB strives to educate and empower generations of community and environmental stewards through its National Youth Advisory Council (YAC) and Keep America Beautiful Schools programs. Through the Keep America Beautiful community-based affiliate network and educational programs, more than 2 million youth were reached and educated across the country. YAC provides a unique opportunity for high school students from diverse backgrounds across the nation to participate in a service learning and leadership development program. Waste in Place is the Keep America Beautiful educational resource developed for prekindergarten through 12th grade students and educators. KAB Schools is a youth initiative offering schools easy-to-use educational programs which provide measurable results and are youth driven. There are three learning service-learning projects, including a Waste Audit, Litter Free Places, and Trashless Tree Trails. 


=== Partnership with other organizations ===
KAB delivers programming and materials through a network of organizations. In addition to KAB's certified affiliates, the organization partners with other groups to expand its reach. These include multiple State Recycling Organizations, Boys & Girls Clubs of America, Hands On Network and the Points of Light Institute, the Arbor Day Foundation, Pennsylvania Horticultural Society, National CleanUp Day, Ocean Conservancy, Sustainable Urban Forests Coalition, and Take Pride in America, among others.Scouting Keep America Beautiful Day was first cosponsored by Keep America Beautiful and the Boy Scouts of America in 1971 as a massive national cleanup and recycling program.  Keep America Beautiful also co-sponsors the "Keep America Beautiful Hometown USA Award" with the Boy Scouts of America that boy scouts can earn by completing a non-paid, community service project (minimum of eight hours of time, two of which must involve management planning, with the other six hours consisting of carrying out the project), with the approved scout project being designed to "help keep America beautiful and benefit the community either physically or financially."


== In popular culture ==
The "Crying Indian" ad has been parodied on Married... with Children, Wayne's World 2, The Simpsons episode "Trash of the Titans", the Futurama episode "Where the Buggalo Roam", the Farrelly brothers movie Kingpin, the South Park episode "Go Fund Yourself", The League episode "Yobogoya," the Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law episode "Back to the Present," and the Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt episode "Kimmy Finds Her Mom!". The ad was also parodied in an E-Trade commercial that aired during Super Bowl XXXV in 2001.
Lassie was featured and recruited in helping to Keep America Beautiful by Lady Bird Johnson as the Nation's Mascot and War Against Litter in the beautification campaign. Lassie is in a poster with a forest ranger and the caption reads: "Help Lassie Keep America Beautiful".


== See also ==
Container deposit legislation
Don't Mess with Texas
Iron Eyes Cody
Keep Britain Tidy
Clean Up Australia
National Cleanup Day
Litter in the United States
Recycling in the United States
Roads Beautifying Association (in the UK)
TIDY Northern Ireland


== References ==


== External links ==
Keep America Beautiful