Title: Dormakaba
Aspects: {'Kaba', 'KABA'}

dormakaba Holding AG (former Kaba Holding AG) is a global security group based in Rümlang, Switzerland. It employs around 16,000 people in over 50 countries. It formed as the result of a merger between former Kaba and former Dorma in September 2015 and is publicly traded on the SIX Swiss Exchange.dormakaba generated a turnover of CHF 2.8 billion in the financial year 2017/18 (as of June 30, 2018).dormakaba is divided into five segments:

Access Solutions AMER (North and South America)
Access Solutions APAC (Asia Pacific)
Access Solutions DACH (Germany, Austria, Switzerland)
Access Solutions EMEA (Europe, Middle East, Africa)
Key and Wall SolutionsAll products for the market for access and security solutions are combined in the four Access Solutions segments. The Key and Wall Solutions segment comprises business with key blanks and key cutting machines as well as horizontal and vertical partitioning systems and acoustic movable partitions.


== History ==
The dormakaba Group was formed 2015 as a merger between the family-owned German company Dorma and the Swiss Kaba Group. At that point, both companies had a history of over 100 years. The planned merger was announced on April 30, 2015. After competition authorities approved the merger at the end of August 2015, the dormakaba group commenced operations on September 1, 2015. 


=== History of Kaba ===
In 1862, Franz Bauer founded Kaba in Zurich as a locksmith shop and cash register factory. The firm was sold in 1915 to Leo Bodmer, who renamed the company to Bauer AG. When inventor Fritz Schori created the first cylinder lock with reversible key in 1934, Bauer AG patented the invention and named the lock after the firm's founder Franz Bauer, known in German as 'Kassenbauer' (maker of cash registers) – 'Kaba' for short.
Over the years, the company gradually expanded its portfolio and established itself throughout Europe.  In 1995, Bauer Holding AG was renamed to Kaba Holding AG and the company's shares were listed on the Zurich stock exchange.
With the takeover of Unican Security Systems (Montreal) in 2001, Kaba gained a foothold in North America and added the Silca, Ilco and Kaba Mas brands as part of the merger.
In 2006, the company acquired the Wah Yuet Group in China,  the US company Computerized Security Systems (CSS) with its well-known Saflok and La Gard brands, and the Dutch company H. Cillekens Zn. B.V. In addition, it entered into various joint ventures with the Indian Minda Group.
At Security 2008, Kaba was awarded the «Security Innovation Award» in gold for its newly developed identification technology RCID.In 2011, Kaba sold the business segment Door Automation (Kaba Gilgen AG, formerly Gilgen AG) to the Japanese Nabtesco Group.In 2015, the company merged with Dorma.


=== History of Dorma ===
1908: Foundation of Dörken & Mankel KG in Ennepetal (DE.)
1950: Entry into the door closer business
1962: Production of the first automatic doors
1976: Glass fittings are added to the product range
1978: Production becomes international - first production facility in Singapore (SG)
1987: Safety solutions and emergency exit control systems
2002: New business with mobile partition walls
2013: More than 1 billion euros annual turnover
Merger with Kaba


== Areas of operation ==
Door hardware
Electronic access and data
Entrance Systems
Mechanical key systems
Safe locks
Lodging systems
Interior glass systems
Key systems
Movable walls


== Brands ==
dormakaba operates with the following brands worldwide:

Best
Dorma
Dorma Hüppe
dormakaba
Ilco
Kaba
Kilargo
Legic
Mesker
Modernfold
Phi Precision
Probuck
Saflok La Gard
Silca
Skyfold


== References ==


== External links ==