Title: Bruce Goldstein
Aspects: {'B. Goldstein'}

Bruce Goldstein (born July 5, 1952) is a New York City repertory film programmer, producer, archivist, and historian.


== Biography ==
Bruce Goldstein, the son of Murray and Betty (Horowitz) Goldstein, was born in Amityville, New York, on Long Island and raised in nearby Hicksville. He attended Hicksville High School and went on to Boston University, dropping out to run a movie theater in Provincetown, Massachusetts, on Cape Cod. He later moved to New York City to work for Sid Geffen, owner of the Bleecker Street Cinema and Carnegie Hall Cinema. He went on to program for the Thalia.Goldstein became the director of repertory programming for New York's Film Forum in 1986. At Film Forum he presented series on film noir, silent comedy, classic 3-D, Pre-Code movies, science fiction and "gimmick movies" of the 1950s, Westerns, and French crime films.In 1990 Goldstein was awarded the New York Film Critics Circle Awards for "visionary programming."In 1997, Goldstein founded Rialto Pictures, which has been described as "the gold standard of reissue distributors" by Los Angeles Times/NPR film critic Kenneth Turan. Rialto's releases include Murderous Maids, the original 1954 Japanese version of Godzilla, a restored print of the 1974 documentary Hearts and Minds, The Battle of Algiers, Mafioso, Lola Montès, and the first U.S. release of Made in U.S.A., and Z. In 2007, the Museum of Modern Art presented a retrospective tribute to Goldstein's company, entitled "Rialto Pictures: Reviving Classic Cinema."In 2004, the government of France named Goldstein a Chevalier (knight) of the Order of Arts and Letters for his work releasing, promoting, and screening classic French Cinema.In 2009 Goldstein was awarded the Mel Novikoff award by the San Francisco International Film Festival, an award given annually "to an individual or institution whose work has enhanced the filmgoing public's knowledge and appreciation of world cinema."In 2010 Goldstein was nominated by James Billington, Librarian of Congress, to the Board of the National Film Registry.


== References ==


== External links ==
Rialto Pictures Official Website
Living In Black and White The Villager
Bruce Goldstein's Top 10 The Criterion Collection
Repertory Film Programming: A Web Exclusive Supplement to a Critical Symposium includes an essay on repertory film in New York by Goldstein.