Title: Your Name
Aspects: {'Na Na Na'}

Your Name. (Japanese: 君の名は。, Hepburn: Kimi no Na wa.) is a 2016 Japanese animated romantic fantasy drama film written and directed by Makoto Shinkai and produced by CoMix Wave Films. The film was produced by Noritaka Kawaguchi and Genki Kawamura, with music composed by Radwimps. Your Name tells the story about a high school boy in Tokyo and a high school girl in a rural town who suddenly and inexplicably begin to swap bodies. The film stars the voices of Ryunosuke Kamiki, Mone Kamishiraishi, Masami Nagasawa and Etsuko Ichihara. Shinkai's eponymous novel was published a month before the film's premiere.
Your Name was distributed by Toho. It premiered at the Anime Expo 2016 convention in Los Angeles, California on July 3, 2016, and in Japan on August 26, 2016. It was praised for its animation, complex narrative, musical score, and emotional weight. The film was also a major commercial success, with a total gross of $361 million, becoming the highest-grossing anime film and Japanese film of all time up until Studio Ghibli's Spirited Away's China release in 2019, the fourth highest-grossing film of all time in Japan, the eighth highest-grossing traditionally animated film, and the 12th highest-grossing non-English film worldwide. The film won the 49th Sitges Film Festival, the 2016 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards, and the 71st Mainichi Film Awards for Best Animated Feature Film, as well as receiving a nomination for the 40th Japan Academy Prize for the Best Animation of the Year. An American live-action remake is currently in development.


== Plot ==
High school girl Mitsuha Miyamizu lives in the fictional town of Itomori in Japan's mountainous Hida region. She is bored with the country life, and wishes to be a handsome boy in her next life. She begins switching bodies intermittently with Taki Tachibana, a high school boy in Tokyo, when they wake up. They communicate by writing messages on paper, their phones, and sometimes on each other's skin. Mitsuha causes Taki to develop a relationship with his coworker Miki, while Taki causes Mitsuha to become popular in school.
One day, Taki, as Mitsuha, accompanies her grandmother and sister to leave the ritual alcohol kuchikamizake, made by Mitsuha, as an offering at the shrine on a mountaintop outside the town. The shrine is believed to represent the body of the village guardian god who rules human experiences and connections. Mitsuha's latest note tells Taki about a comet expected to pass Earth on the day of her town festival.
The next day, Taki wakes up in his body. After an unsuccessful date with Miki, he tries to call Mitsuha but cannot reach her, and the body switching ends. He decides to visit Itomori, but he does not know the town's name, and his memories of it are fading while Mitsuha's messages have disappeared. A restaurant owner in Hida finally recognizes Itomori from Taki's sketch and tells him when the comet unexpectedly split into two, the larger piece kept moving, but the smaller one crashed onto Earth and destroyed the town. Taki finds Mitsuha's name in the records of fatalities and discovers from the date of the disaster their timelines were separated by three years.
Taki goes to the shrine to drink Mitsuha's kuchikamizake, hoping to reconnect with her body and warn her of the comet strike. Through a vision, Taki discovers that Mitsuha, having fallen in love with him, met his past self while trying to meet him personally. He wakes in her body on the morning of the town festival; Mitsuha's grandmother deduces his identity, and tells him the body switching is part of the Miyamizu family history as caretakers of the shrine. He convinces Mitsuha's friends Tessie and Sayaka to help evacuate the town by cutting the power and broadcasting a false emergency alert, but the plan fails. He realizes that Mitsuha must be in his body at the shrine and goes back to find her.
Mitsuha wakes up in Taki's body at the shrine. When Taki reaches the shrine as the sun sets they sense each other's presence, but are separated by three years. However, when twilight falls, they return to their own bodies and meet. They attempt to write each other's names on their hands so they will remember each other, but twilight passes and Mitsuha disappears before she can write hers.
As Mitsuha races back to town to convince her estranged father, Toshiki Miyamizu, who is also Itomori's mayor, to evacuate the town, her memories of Taki start to fade, and finds Taki wrote "I love you" on her hand instead of his name. The comet piece crashes to Earth, destroying Itomori. Taki wakes up in his own time at the shrine, remembering nothing.
Five years later, Taki has graduated from university and is searching for a job. He senses he is missing something important, and learns that the inhabitants of Itomori survived by following the mayor's order. One day, Taki and Mitsuha see each other when their trains draw parallel, and are compelled to disembark and search for one another, finally meeting on a staircase. They initially start semi-awkwardly walking away, until Taki uneasily asks Mitsuha if they have met before, and Mitsuha happily responds that she felt the same way: their connection reestablishing, they shed tears of happiness, and simultaneously ask for each other's name.


== Voice cast ==


== Production ==
In Makoto Shinkai's proposal sent to Toho in September 14, 2014, the film was originally titled Yume to Shiriseba (夢と知りせば, If I Knew It Was a Dream), derived from a passage in a waka, or "Japanese poem", attributed to Ono no Komachi. Its title changed to Kimi no Musubime (きみの結びめ, Your Connection) and Kimi wa Kono Sekai no Hanbun (きみはこの世界のはんぶん, You Are Half of This World) before becoming Kimi no Na Wa.Inspiration for the story came from works including Shūzō Oshimi's Inside Mari, Ranma ½, the Heian period novel Torikaebaya Monogatari, and Greg Egan's short story The Safe-Deposit Box. Shinkai also cited Interstellar (2014) by Christopher Nolan as an influence.
While the town of Itomori, one of the film's settings, is fictional, the film drew inspirations from real-life locations that provided backdrop for the town. Such locations include the city of Hida in Gifu Prefecture and its library, Hida City Library.The planning of Your Name was done in Toon Boom Storyboard Pro preproduction and storyboarding software.


== Music ==

Yojiro Noda, the lead vocalist of the Japanese rock band Radwimps, composed the theme music of Your Name. Director Makoto Shinkai requested him to compose its music "in a way that the music will (supplement) the dialogue or monologue of the characters". Your Name features the following songs performed by Radwimps:

"Yumetōrō" (夢灯籠, Yumetōrō, lit. "Dream Lantern")
"Zenzenzense" (前前前世, Zenzenzense, lit. "Past Past Past Life")
"Sparkle" (スパークル, Supākuru)
"Nandemonaiya" (なんでもないや, Nandemonaiya, lit. "It's Nothing")The soundtrack of the film was well received by both audiences and critics alike and is acknowledged as being one of the factors behind its success at the box office. The film's soundtrack was the runner-up in the "Best Soundtrack" category at the 2016 Newtype Anime Awards, while the song "Zenzenzense" was the runner-up in the "Best Theme Song Category".


== Release ==

The film premiered at the 2016 Anime Expo convention in Los Angeles, California on July 3, 2016, and later was released theatrically in Japan on August 26, 2016. The film is scheduled to be released in 92 countries. It was released in China by Huaxia Film Distribution on December 2, 2016. In order to qualify for the Academy Awards, the film was released for one week (December 2–8, 2016) in Los Angeles. The film was released in Australian cinemas on limited release on November 24, 2016, by Madman Entertainment in both its original Japanese and an English dub. Madman also released the film in New Zealand on December 1, 2016. The film was also released in the United Kingdom on November 18, 2016, distributed by Anime Limited. On January 17, 2017, Funimation announced that the film would be released in North American theaters on April 7, 2017.


=== Home media ===
Your Name was released in 4K UHD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on July 26, 2017, in Japan by Toho Pictures. The release was offered in Regular, Special, and Collector's editions. FUNimation announced on July 1 at Anime Expo 2017 that the film would be released on Blu-ray and DVD by the end of 2017 but didn't specify a date. At Otakon 2017, they announced they are releasing the movie in both Standard and Limited Edition Blu-Ray + DVD Combo Packs on November 7, 2017.In its first week, the Blu-ray standard edition sold 202,370 units, Limited First Pressing sold 125,982 units and the special edition sold 94,079 units. The DVD Standard Edition placed first, selling 215,963. Your Name is the first Anime to Place 3 BD Releases in Top 10 for 2 straight weeks. In 2017, the film generated ¥6,532,421,094 ($59,157,621) in media revenue from physical home video, soundtrack and book sales in Japan.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===

Your Name became a huge commercial success, especially in Japan, where it grossed ¥23 billion (~US$190 million). The film achieved the second-largest gross for a domestic film in Japan, behind Spirited Away, and the fourth-largest ever, behind Titanic and Frozen. It is the first anime not directed by Hayao Miyazaki to earn more than $100 million (~￥10 billion) at the Japanese box office. It topped the box office in Japan for a record-breaking 12 non-consecutive weekends. It held the number-one position for nine consecutive weekends before being toppled by Death Note: Light Up the New World in the last weekend of October. It returned to the top for another three weeks before finally being dethroned by Hollywood blockbuster Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them.The success of the film also extended beyond Japan. In China, it became the highest-grossing Japanese film in the world's second-largest movie market on December 17, 2016. It has grossed $81.3 million in China and is the highest-grossing 2D animated film in the country. Its opening screened in over 7,000 theaters. It made an estimated $10.9 million on its opening day from 66,000 screenings and attracting over 2.77 million admissions, the biggest 2D animated opening in the country. It also held the record for the highest-grossing non-Hollywood foreign film in China, up until it was surpassed by two Indian films Dangal and Secret Superstar in May 2017 and February 2018 respectively.It is the highest-grossing Japanese film in Thailand, with ฿44.1 million ($1.23 million). As of December 26, the film has grossed US$771,945 in Australia. and US$95,278 in New Zealand. On a December 20 blog post, the Australian distributor Madman stated that the film had made over $1,000,000 AUD in the Australian box office alone before closing its limited release run. The film was number-one on its opening five days in South Korea, with 1.18 million admissions and a gross of $8.2 million, becoming the first Japanese film since Howl's Moving Castle to reach number one in the country.


=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 97%, based on 111 reviews, and an average rating of 8.23/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "As beautifully animated as it is emotionally satisfying, Your Name adds another outstanding chapter to writer-director Makoto Shinkai's filmography." On Metacritic, the film has a score 79 out of 100, based on 26 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".Mark Schilling of The Japan Times gave the film a rating of 4 out of 5 and praised the film's animation for its "blend of gorgeous, realistic detail and emotionally grounded fantasy". However, he criticized the film's "over-deliver[y]" of "the comedy of adolescent embarrassment and awkwardness" and its ending for being "To the surprise of no one who has ever seen a Japanese seishun eiga (youth drama)".Reception outside of Japan was also very positive. Mark Kermode called the film his ninth favourite film to be released in the United Kingdom in 2016. US reviews were mostly positive. The New York Times described it as "a wistfully lovely Japanese tale", while The Atlantic said it was "a dazzling new work of anime". Conversely, The Boston Globe had a mixed opinion of the film, saying that it was "pretty but too complicated". Mike Toole from Anime News Network listed it as the third-best anime film of all time. Ron Clements and John Musker, directors of the Oscar-nominated animation Moana, praised the film for its beauty and uniqueness.Despite the praise he received, Shinkai insisted that the film is not as good as it could have been: "There are things we could not do, Masashi Ando [Director of animation] wanted to keep working [on] but had to stop us for lack of money ... For me it's incomplete, unbalanced. The plot is fine but the film is not at all perfect. Two years was not enough."


== Accolades ==


== Adaptations ==


=== Books ===

Your Name is a Japanese novel written by Makoto Shinkai. It is a novelization of the animated film of the same name, which was directed by Shinkai. It was published in Japan by Kadokawa on June 18, 2016, a month prior to the film premiere. By September 2016, the novel had sold around 1,029,000 copies. An official visual guide was also released. The novel sold over 1.3 million copies, while the novel and visual guide sold over 2.5 million copies combined.


=== Live-action film ===
On September 27, 2017, producer J.J. Abrams and screenwriter Eric Heisserer announced that they were working on a live-action remake of Your Name to be released by Paramount Pictures and Bad Robot Productions, alongside the original film's producers, Toho, who will handle the film's distribution in Japan. The film is being written by Eric Heisserer, who revealed that the Japanese right holders want it to be made from the western point of view. In February 2019, Marc Webb signed on to direct the remake. The film will be about a young Native American woman living in a rural area and a young man from Chicago who discover they are magically and intermittently swapping bodies.


== See also ==
List of highest-grossing animated films
List of highest-grossing anime films
List of highest-grossing films in Japan


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website  (in Japanese)
Official website
Your Name. on IMDb
Your Name. at Rotten Tomatoes
Your Name. at Metacritic
Your Name. (film) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia