The Moxy Show

The Moxy Show (also known as The Moxy Pirate Show and The Moxy & Flea Show) is an American animated anthology television series produced by Turner Production for Cartoon Network. The show ran on November 26, 1993, originally as The Moxy Pirate Show, and consisted of classic cartoons divided by 3-D animated interstitials featuring Moxy and Flea, respectively a dog and a flea. The show ran on Cartoon Network from November 26, 1993 until November 9, 1995, where its finale was the sole episode for The Moxy & Flea Show. Reruns lasted until April 1, 2000. It is considered the first original series on Cartoon Network, but due to the production style, Space Ghost Coast to Coast is considered Cartoon Network's first fully produced series.


== Production ==
The series was also known  The Moxy Pirate Show, which featured Moxy and Flea. In 1994 the series was known as The Moxy Show. In 1995, it was renamed again to The Moxy & Flea Show, with major changes for a single episode:

Moxy's design changed to a large degree. As opposed to wearing his usual yellow shirt with red/black checkerboard pants, and palette-swapped black and white sneakers; both of which resemble the likeness of Cartoon Network's traditional checkerboard logo, he is seen wearing a longer sleeved, green/black striped shirt and black jeans, complete with non palette-swapped sneakers, which seem to resemble those of Converse All-Stars. In addition, his eyes have become much smaller, with heterochromic green (left) and light blue (right) eyes complete with pupils, whereas they were previously red (left) and dark blue (right), sans pupils. His yellow whiskers and freckles have disappeared in his new design, his nose changed from the color purple to black, and his fur was changed to a darker shade of orange.
Flea's design was slightly changed. Flea wore a blue fez instead of a propellor beanie, his height was increased, making him half as tall as Moxy. His eye color changed from blue and yellow to just yellow eyes with red pupils. Comedian Chris Rock replaced illusionist Penn Jillette as the voice of the character.
A new opening sequence was used, featuring a new theme song composed by Ben Friedman. Moxy and Flea dance new moves and have almost no speaking parts (in one part, Moxy says "Come on!").The pilot did not test well enough to allow more episodes to be produced, as revealed by Frank Gresham who worked on "The Moxy & Flea Show". Reruns were supposedly removed completely on April 1, 2000, the same day the classical cartoon programming were moved to Boomerang 
The CGI Moxy is considered the first real-time (sometimes called a "live") cartoon, though only broadcast live through the "Great International Toon-In". A puppeteer wearing a motion capture apparatus would act out Moxy's motions, while Goldthwait provided the voice, and a technician would control facial expressions.
The show is considered to be a lost television series since it was never to be found anywhere because it was never picked up by Boomerang and it was never released in home media.
This is the only Cartoon Network original series to be animated with computer animation, as all of the other programs featuring CGI are acquired animated programming or Cartoon Network co-productions. It is the first CN show to be animated with cartoon animation as well, making The Moxy Show the first Cartoon Network original series to feature a hybrid of different animation styles (Courage the Cowardly Dog would be the second, and The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy, Chowder and The Amazing World of Gumball following). The show is also the first to use stock footage from classical shows (followed by Space Ghost Coast to Coast, the second CN series to air).
Although this is the only Cartoon Network original series produced and animated in the United States with computer animation.
To this day, only a handful of clips, plus various segments of the "Great International Toon-In", a Spanish airing from the Moxy Show era, a Spanish airing from the Moxy Pirate Show era, a promotional VHS containing the Only Found Episode Of the Moxy Show era and the only episode to the Moxy & Flea Show era .
There was also an online CartoonNetwork.com comic made called "What Ever Happened to Moxy?" that may have wrapped up the story but only the first panel of it is currently visible to the public.Moxy made brief cameos in the OK K.O.! Let's Be Heroes episode "Crossover Nexus", along with other characters from animated Cartoon Network original shows.


== Characters ==


=== Moxy ===
Moxy (voiced by Bobcat Goldthwait impersonating Cheech Marin) is a 3-D animated dog who liked to spend time goofing off and having fun with his sidekick, Flea, and also has a crush on Melody from Josie and the Pussycats. Although he never made it big in the cartoon industry, and usually auditioned for a number of roles on the network without making a call back, he was given the opportunity to work as the janitor at Cartoon Network, and usually 'jammed the signal' once a week during the days when he flew solo before Flea was introduced.His first appearance on television were during the live commercial segments that aired simultaneously during a multi-channel cartoon broadcast on three of the main Turner-owned networks at the time; TNT, TBS, and Cartoon Network. His catchphrase is a lip-flapping sound, barking and a fart sound, stating that he just made it up.


=== Flea ===
Flea (voiced by Penn Jillette and Chris Rock) is Moxy's sidekick, and usually the man of the duo, who enjoyed spending time and watching television with Moxy. He helps a monkey king get a new set of hair to hide his bald skin causing him to rise through fame. In "Abducted", it has been revealed that he has a card, and his name was "Flealonius A. Flea".


== Episodes ==


=== The Moxy Show era ===


=== The Moxy & Flea Show era ===


== References ==


== External links ==
The Moxy Show on IMDb
The Moxy Show at TV.com