Cornwall Air Ambulance

The Cornwall Air Ambulance is a dedicated helicopter emergency service for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly. The helicopter flies about 700 missions per year and, as of 2012, had flown over 26,000 missions in total.
When introduced on 1 April 1987, Cornwall's air ambulance  was the first dedicated helicopter emergency medical service operational in the United Kingdom. The helicopters primarily provide a Helicopter Emergency Medical Service (HEMS) through the delivery of a critical care team for the county. The helicopter enables a fast response to the most critically ill or injured and can facilitate access to isolated locations, such as beaches, cliff-tops and moorland areas, which are inaccessible by road. The two air ambulances are maintained by the Cornwall Air Ambulance Trust.


== Operations ==

The helicopters are based at a hangar at Newquay Airport (EGHQ), near Newquay, which enables servicing and maintenance to be carried out overnight, which was impossible at the original open-air base at Royal Cornwall Hospital (Treliske). The new base is also more centrally located, leading to quicker response times in many parts of the county. The helicopter can be airborne within two minutes of an emergency call and flies at 150 mph (240 km/h). It can cover the entire county in less than 20 minutes and reach the Isles of Scilly in 28 minutes. On average it takes 12 minutes from the time of the call to the scene of the incident.


== Aircrew ==
The air ambulance carries a crew of three: the pilot and two critical care paramedics, or a critical care paramedic and a doctor. The aircrew are selected from existing ambulance service paramedics and specially trained for their work on the helicopter. The training period is a minimum of one year which includes an extensive portfolio of critical care practice and a postgraduate certificate as part of the MSc in pre-hospital critical care/retrieval and transport. Successful trainees are then confirmed in role as Specialist Paramedics in Critical Care (SPCC) but are more commonly referred to as critical care paramedics (CCP). They are additionally trained as helicopter technical crewmembers, responsible for air to ground communications as well as navigation and assisting the pilot in flight as required. There was originally a pool of twenty aircrew who worked on the air ambulance on a rotation basis. When they were not on helicopter duty, the crew would revert to their normal jobs on the road ambulances in the County. In 2006, the system was changed: now there are just seven full-time aircrew paramedics to improve continuity, and a team of five doctors, who fly with the paramedics four days per week.


== Aircraft ==

The first helicopter was a MBB Bo 105D (registration G-AZTI) which was replaced by a slightly larger Bo 105 (registration G-CDBS) which was used until 2001, when it was replaced with the more advanced Eurocopter EC135T (G-KRNW). The EC135 is used extensively as an air ambulance in many places around the world. It has four rotor blades to ensure a smooth flight, which can prove particularly beneficial for patients suffering head or spinal injuries. Twin turbine engines give it a cruising speed of 160 mph (260 km/h), and skid landing gear allows it to cope with all types of terrain. Its compact dimensions allow it to land in confined spaces, yet it has room to carry two stretcher patients. It contains all equipment found on any front-line ambulance plus other special items.
In late 2014, the Cornwall Air Ambulance changed their aircraft provider from Bond Helicopters to Specialist Aviation Services, through their sub company, Medical Aviation Services. With the change came a change in helicopter and the service now operates the MD Helicopters MD Explorer, with its NOTAR design. As part of the contract the service now have two helicopters (registration G-CNWL and G-CIOS - formerly G-LNAA and G-SASO respectively), one on operational readiness, the other on immediate standby in case of engineering requirements or un serviceability of the primary aircraft. Both MD902 helicopters were delivered as night capable for HEMS operations in darkness. As of 2015, the helicopter is available 12 hours of the day, a first for the air ambulance service in Cornwall. This means that during winter months the helicopters are available even during darker hours, thanks to the use of special night vision goggles mounted on the helmets.


== Dispatch ==
The control centre for the South Western Ambulance Service (SWAS) is located at Exeter and is staffed 20 hours a day, 365 days a year. It is here that the decisions are made regarding air ambulance mobilisation across the SWAS coverage area.


== Cost and financing ==
Operational costs for the Cornwall Air Ambulance are £80,000 a month, as of 2007. This includes the lease of the aircraft, pilots, service engineers, spares, servicing and insurances, as well as a charge of £350 per flying hour to cover fuel and other combustibles. The cost of the critical care paramedics is shared with the South Western Ambulance Service by whom they are employed.
The Cornwall Air Ambulance is a charitable organisation solely maintained by donations as it receives no form of official funding. The resident population and visitors to Cornwall finance the air ambulance by donations, various fund-raising events, purchase of weekly lottery tickets and legacies.


== See also ==

Air ambulances in the United Kingdom
Devon Air Ambulance
Healthcare in Cornwall


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website