Force of Habit

Force of Habit is the fifth studio album by American thrash metal band Exodus, released on August 17, 1992 by Capitol Records in the USA, and Toshiba-EMI in Japan. The songs are a departure from the thrash metal style for Exodus, slower and more experimental. Many of the song titles are common figures of speech.
Force of Habit is Exodus's last release until their 1997 live album Another Lesson in Violence and their last studio album until 2004's Tempo of the Damned, since the band went on two extended hiatuses. This is Exodus's last album to feature John Tempesta on drums and is also their only album to feature Mike Butler on bass as well as the band's only release without the jagged edged "Exodus" logo that had appeared on all of the band's previous and subsequent releases. It was later re-released in 2008 in a limited edition mini-album packaging to resemble the original vinyl release, including the inner sleeve. This version was remastered and includes the bonus tracks from the Japanese release. Force of Habit was also the second and last Exodus album to include more than one cover song (the other being 1989's Fabulous Disaster).


== Reception ==
Force of Habit received a mixed review from AllMusic's Roch Parisien, who awarded the album three stars out of five, and stated that "Exodus slows the pace a notch, drops the guitars a register, and gives the thrash a little room to breathe." However, Gary Holt stated on Metal Evolution that Force of Habit is his least favorite Exodus album.Force of Habit was the first Exodus album not to chart on the Billboard 200 since 1985's Bonded by Blood.


== Track listing ==


== Band line-up ==
Steve "Zetro" Souza – vocals
Gary Holt – guitars
Rick Hunolt – guitars
Michael Butler  – bass
John Tempesta – drums


== Credits ==
Recorded at Battery Studios, London, UK
Produced and engineered by Chris Tsangarides
Assistant engineered by Chris Marshall and Sarah Bedingham
Mixed by Steve Thompson and Michael Barbiero at Riversound, New York City, USA
Additional recording and remixing by Marc Senesac at The Plant, Sausalito, California, USA
Mastered by George Marino at Sterling Sound, New York City, USA
Artwork by Ralph Steadman


== References ==