Starship Troopers 3: Marauder

Starship Troopers 3: Marauder is a 2008 American military science fiction film written and directed by Edward Neumeier and starring Casper Van Dien who returned as Johnny Rico from the original film, along with Jolene Blalock and Boris Kodjoe. It is a sequel to Starship Troopers (1997) and Starship Troopers 2: Hero of the Federation (2004) (which were both written by Neumeier) and the third installment of the Starship Troopers film series.
Production started in May 2007, with principal photography commencing in South Africa.The film was released directly to DVD in the U.S. on August 5, 2008.


== Plot ==
In the eleven years of "The Second Bug War", the Mobile Infantry has improved their weapons and tactics, while the Bugs have countered by developing many new Arachnid variants. The United Citizen Federation now finds itself engaged in prolonged trench warfare. The Federation puts out a positive spin through the media, while using its judicial and military authority to suppress peace protesters and religious fanatics.
Colonel Johnny Rico is stationed on the agricultural planet Roku San, where the popular Sky Marshal Omar Anoke pays a visit. Rico's old friend, General Dix Hauser, gets into a bar fight with farmers protesting against the war. When Rico stops Dix from shooting a farmer, Dix orders his arrest, but the base defences suddenly fail due to an alien attack. Rico knocks down Dix and leaves to fight the Arachnids. When Roku San falls, Rico is blamed by the Federal Media and condemned to execution for insubordination.
Captain Lola Beck is piloting Anoke to Sanctuary, the Fleet's secret HQ, when they are marooned on classified planet OM-1. Admiral Enolo Phid suppresses this information, but Dix learns of the situation and Dix has Rico's execution faked, wanting him to lead a rescue mission.
On OM-1, an apparent earthquake causes Dr. Wiggs to fall into a crevasse, where Anoke sees a giant eye staring from below. Cynical cook Jingo Ryan is next to die after he takes shelter within a cluster of rock outcroppings, which are actually Arachnid limbs which pull him below. Engineer Bull Brittles asks the deeply religious Holly Little to marry him, but dies shortly after.
On Earth, General Hauser confronts Admiral Phid about why she is abandoning the Sky Marshal, only to be arrested. Phid reveals to him that Anoke is responsible for the downfall of Roku San, having used psychic powers to communicate with the "Brain of Brains", also known as "Behemecoatyl", through their captured Brain Bug (see Starship Troopers). The Sky Marshal adopted the Bugs’ religion, hoping he could save humanity if he could make peace with them. He turned off the electric barrier surrounding the base on Roku San to show his willingness for peace.  The Federation now believes the original Brain Bug allowed itself to be captured in order to pass on intelligence from inside the Federation. When the Federation decides  to kill and dissect their Brain Bug, it unleashes a telepathic attack, killing many soldiers before Hauser kills it.
It is revealed that Admiral Phid ignored the distress calls from OM-1 so she could become the new Sky Marshal; however, she failed to take into account that highly skilled Beck would be with Anoke.
On OM-1, the stranded make contact with Behemecoatyl, who communicates with them through the corpses of their fallen comrades and soon kills Anoke to absorb his knowledge; Beck and Holly, the last survivors, begin praying to be saved.
Rico leads the Marauders, an elite team of troopers, on a rescue mission, using the Federation's new battle-suits. They defeat the Arachnid warriors on OM-1, suffer no casualties, and rescue Beck and Holly. OM-1 is revealed to be the home of the Bug Hive, the Arachnids' ruling body, and Fleet destroys it from orbit with a "Q Bomb".
Rico is cleared of all charges, promoted to the rank of General and given command of the Marauder program. Anoke is reported to have died in a terrorist attack, staged by the government to explain his disappearance. Dix and Beck are married, Admiral Phid is appointed the new Sky Marshal with Dix as her second-in command, and Holly becomes a Federal chaplain. Dozens of peace protesters are hanged in connection to the purported terrorist attack.  Phid, impressed with the way that Sky Marshal Anoke was rendered servile by the Arachnids' religion, decides the Federation should adopt a religion, and Christianity is embraced by the Federation.


== Cast ==
Casper Van Dien as Colonel Johnny Rico
Jolene Blalock as Captain Lola Beck
Boris Kodjoe as General Dix Hauser
Stephen Hogan as Sky Marshal Omar Anoke
Marnette Patterson as Holly Little
Stelio Savante as Bull Brittles
Cécile Breccia as Link Manion
Jon Falkow as Jingo Ryan
Danny Keogh as Dr. Wiggs
Amanda Donohoe as Admiral Enolo Phid
Ashley Forshaw as Bug Scream
Tanya van Graan as Sergeant A. Sunday
Nicole Salandra as Sergeant J. Kirby
Corey Burton as Official (voice)


== Reception ==
Starship Troopers 3: Marauder has had mixed to average reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, as of 2009, the film was holding a 50% "rotten" rating from six professional reviews, three rotten and three fresh.
Joe Leydon of Variety stated: "Die-hard fans of Starship Troopers, Paul Verhoeven's notorious 1997 cult-fave sci-fi spectacle, will be pleased to note that its second made-for-vid sequel gamely attempts to replicate the original pic's over-the-top style and self-satirical tone. Unlike 2004's negligible Starship Troopers 2: Hero of the Federation, a relatively straightforward actioner, the latest episode reprises Verhoeven's love-it-or-hate-it mix of gruesome mayhem, overstated melodrama, peek-a-boo nudity and tongue-in-cheek fascist aesthetics."
Alex Dorn of UGO.com stated that "fans of the original movie should be pretty happy with this venture" but that those "expecting the whiz-bang big budget wonder of the original will be disappointed." He gave the film an overall rating of a B minus.Scott Weinberg of FEARnet gave the film a fresh review, stating that the film is "probably a rental more so than a must-own, but certainly worth a look if you dug the first film".In March 2009, Starship Troopers 3: Marauder was nominated for a 2009 Saturn Award in the Best DVD Release Category.


== See also ==
List of films featuring powered exoskeletons


== References ==


== External links ==
Starship Troopers 3: Marauder on IMDb