Punjabi University

Punjabi University is a state university located in Patiala, Punjab, India. Punjabi University teaches and researches in science, engineering and technology, humanities, social sciences, performing arts and sports. It was established on the 30 April 1962, and is only the second university in the world to be named after a language, after Hebrew University of Israel. Originally it was conceived as a unitary multi-faculty teaching and research university, primarily meant for the development and enrichment of Punjabi language and culture, but alive to the social and education requirements of the state.


== Campus ==

The university campus is spread over an area of over 600 acres (2.4 km2), on the Patiala-Chandigarh road, about 7 kilometers from Patiala. The institution has more than 70 teaching and research departments, covering disciplines in Humanities, Science, Engineering, Pharmacy, Law, Fine Arts, Computer Science and Business Management. University also conducts various degree, diploma and certificate courses through distance learning . University not only caters to students from northern region, but students from African countries also take admission here.  
The campus has amenities like a State Bank of India branch, Post office, Science and Arts Auditorium, open-air theatre, guest and faculty houses, seminar complexes, faculty club, botanical garden and several spacious lawns, a model school and own fleet of buses for transportation of students and staff. 
The university has undertaken the responsibility of maintaining the estate of Norah Richards at Andretta, Himachal Pradesh. Arrangements have been made for faculty members and students who wish to carry out study and research in the fields of theatre and television. The university manages Balbir Singh Sahitya Kendra at Dehradun, the capital city of the Uttarakhand. There is a rich library with rare books and manuscripts bequeathed by Bhai Vir Singh, Balbir Singh and Prof Puran Singh, the doyens of Punjabi literature. Research on comparative religions is carried out at this center.


=== Regional centres and Neighborhood campuses ===
The university has four regional centres: the Guru Kashi Regional Center at Bathinda, Guru Kashi Campus at Talwandi Sabo, Regional Centre for Information Technology and Management at Mohali, Nawab Sher Mohammad Khan Institute of Advanced Studies in Urdu, Persian and Arabic at Malerkotla. Punjabi University also maintains seven neighborhood campuses at Rampura Phul, Jhunir, Sardulgarh, Ralla, Maur, Jaito and Dehla Seehan.


=== Constituent colleges ===
The university has also established 13 constituent colleges at Mansa, Rampura Phul, Sardulgarh, Ghudda, Bahadurpur (Mansa), Barnala, Benra (Dhuri),Chuni Kalan, Dhilwan, Ghanaur, Jaito, Meera Pur and Moonak.


== History ==
Punjabi University was established on 30 April 1962 under the Punjabi University Act 1961 as a residential and teaching university, not as an affiliating University. It started functioning from temporary accommodation in Barandari Palace building. Initially its jurisdictional area was fixed as the 10-mile (16 km) radius. There were only nine colleges — six professional and three art and science colleges in Patiala — which fell within its jurisdiction. The university moved to its present campus in 1965. The campus is spread over about 316 acres (1.28 km2). The campus at Patiala makes international standard facilities available for students and researchers.
Although initially the main task before the university was to develop and promote the language of the Punjabi people, it has since evolved into a multi-faculty educational institution. It grew into an affiliating university in 1969, with 43 colleges affiliated to it and covering Patiala, Sangrur and Bathinda districts of Punjab. Since then, it developed significantly and acquired a distinctive character among the centres of education and research in the country. Now, it has more than 278 affiliated colleges spread over nine districts of Punjab. The affiliated colleges are in districts of Patiala, Barnala, Fatehgarh Sahib, Sangrur, Bathinda, Mansa, Mohali, Rupnagar and Faridkot.


== Landmarks ==

Guru Gobind Singh Bhawan
Bhai Kahn Singh Nabha Central Library
Guru Teg Bahadur Hall
Gol Market
Art Gallery
Yadavindra College of Engineering


== Facilities ==


=== Library ===
Bhai Kahn Singh Nabha Central Library is a hub of academic and research activities. It stocks more than 415,000 books and subscribes to several hundred journals. The latest books are added regularly. The library is kept open for 360 days of the year from 8.15 a.m. to 8.15 p.m. The library has a reading hall, which has a capacity for 400 readers. A separate hall for using the personal books and a Reading Room has been provided at the ground floor. One night Reading Room remains open from 8.00 p.m. to 6.00 a.m. To further modernize university library services, it is being computerized.
Ganda Singh Punjabi Reference Library, which is an integral part of the library, is housed in a new building interlinked with the main building. This part of the library has 41,548 books on Punjabi Language, Literature, Punjab History and Culture.
The University Library is maintains libraries in some of the departments at the campus, Extension Library at S.A.S.Nagar (Mohali), and a Library at Regional Center Bathinda. Besides, Balbir Singh Sahitya Kendra, Dehradun has a library containing rare books and manuscripts.


=== Research facilities ===
All the departments are involved to promote research culture and spirit. Most of the departments have been able to mobilize additional research funding from UGC, DST, CSIR,  Planning Commission, government departments and other official funding agencies. Some science departments have been able to develop research tie-ups with industry and have undertaken several consultancy assignments.


=== Sports ===
Students are encouraged to take active part in sports. Facilities for games such as hockey, football, cricket, basketball, volleyball, athletics, etc. and well as indoor games are provided. The Punjabi University has a large gymnasium and a hall for indoor games. It is one of the very few institutions in India to possess its own velodrome.


=== Hostels ===
There are three residential hostels for boys and four residential hostels for girls. The hostels house 4000 students. In addition to this, separate boys and girls hostel for engineering college have started functioning.


=== Health services ===
A health center has an X-ray unit and a laboratory for medical tests. The center has an AIDS awareness wing. Students are entitled to free medical aid by the University Health Center.


=== Other facilities ===
The transport department runs a fleet of buses for linking the campus to parts of Patiala city.


== Acheivements & Awards ==

Punjabi University was awarded the Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (MAKA) Trophy for excellence in sports for a record six-times in year 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2013-17.
The Youth Welfare Department organizes activities all year round. The Punjabi University has won unique distinctions in youth festivals organized by the school's Association of Indian Universities in collaboration with the Ministry of Youth Affairs, government of India, and other events.
The university has won overall second position in National Inter-University Youth Festival, won overall championship in orth Zone Inter-University Youth Festival many times, has won overall championship in Punjab State Inter-University Youth Festival repeatedly and has won overall championship many times in All India Inter-University Punjabi Cultural Festival. Students of Punjabi University have had the privilege of representing India in the festivals of India held in the former USSR, Mauritius, Spain, China, Germany and U.A.E. (Dubai). Apart from the above-mentioned activities, the Department of Youth Welfare organizes hiking, trekking, mountaineering and rock climbing courses, holds youth leadership training camps, prepares the students for participation in All India Level Youth Festivals, organizes Rotract Club, Young Cultural Club, Lee Club and Youth Club. It organizes Yoga Training Camps for the benefit of students of the university teaching departments and colleges. The department publishes the Yuvak Sabha Magazine and holds literary and cultural competitions.
The National Service Scheme being implemented by the NSS Department helps students to participate in different programs of social service and national development.
The university has developed a particular expertise in Sikh Studies and Punjabi Historical Studies. Concerted efforts are being done in developing a translation programme in Punjabi and English. To develop an association with the outstanding scholars in Punjabi language, literature and culture, the university offers Life Fellowships, Senior Fellowships and Fellowships to the eminent scholars in these fields.
To ensure academic freedom, the departments organize seminars, symposia, conferences and workshops every year. The teachers are encouraged to participate in national and international seminars through liberal funding. Many teachers are invited to deliver plenary lectures and preside over the sessions at seminars and conferences.
A new faculty of Arts and Culture has been created. Originality and authenticity in the pursuit of Sikh Studies is another area which is receiving more attention and energy. Balbir Singh Sahitya Kendra Dehradun is being developed as an Advanced Center for Sikh Studies. Punjabi University has established the first ever overseas center for teaching of Punjabi as a foreign language at Espanola, New Mexico.
The university established its own publication bureau which is actively engaged in publishing research work of the academic community. More than 2000 titles have been published.


== Eminent faculty ==
Dalip Kaur Tiwana, writer
Surjit Singh Sethi, theatre
Balraj Pandit, Theatre
Gurpreet Singh Lehal, computer sciences
Baldev Raj Gupta, languages
Gulzar Singh Sandhu, journalism
Hardiljeet Singh 'Lalli', linguistics
Navnindra Behl, theatre


== Ranking ==
Punjabi University was ranked in 151-200 band among universities and 16 in the pharmacy ranking in NIRF India Ranking in 2019.


== See also ==
Punjabi University Guru Kashi Campus
Yadavindra College of Engineering


== Photo gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


== References ==


== External links ==
Punjabi University, Patiala
Admissions portal, Punjabi University
Official facebook page
Computer Science & Engineering Department,Punjabi University, Patiala
Placement Cell, Punjabi University
UGC-Human Resource Development Centre
Distance Education Department
online Examination services
Yadavindra College of Engineering, Talwandi Sabo