Punjab Agricultural University

The Punjab Agricultural University (PAU) in Ludhiana is largest agriculture university in Asia. It is a state agricultural university in India. It was established in 1962 and is the nation's third-oldest agricultural university, after Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, Pantnagar and Orissa University of Agriculture and Technology, Bhubaneshwar. It was formally
inaugurated by the then Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, on July 8, 1963. PAU pioneered the Green Revolution in India in the 1960s. It was bifurcated in 2005 with the formation of Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (GADVASU).


== History ==

The Punjab Agricultural University was established in 1962 to serve the state of erstwhile. In 2006, the College of Veterinary Science was upgraded to become Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Science University (GADVASU) at Ludhiana.
The PAU has played a key role in increasing food grain production in the Punjab State several folds share its reputation and ushering in an era of Green Revolution in India. It has made notable contributions in increasing livestock and poultry production. In recognition of its outstanding achievements in agricultural research, education and extension, it was adjudged the Best Agricultural University in India in 1995.
The Punjab Agricultural University now has four constituent colleges, viz. College of Agriculture, College of Agricultural Engineering, College of Community science and College of Basic Sciences & Humanities.
At present the university, through 28 departments in the four constituent colleges, offers 31 Master's and 30 Ph.D. programmes. The course curricula are constantly revised and restructured to keep pace with the latest developments in agriculture and allied fields.


== Infrastructure and athletics ==
The university has a very strong reputation in sports, and it and its alumni have won many awards for excellence in sport. The university has facilities for basketball, badminton, cycling, cricket, field hockey, football, gymnastics, handball, volleyball, lawn tennis, swimming, table tennis, weight training and Kabbadi. There is also a cycling velodrome, an astroturf field for hockey, and a stadium for various sports.
There is an open-air theatre for cultural activities and a student community center for miscellaneous extracurricular activities. Numerous international and Punjabi culture festivities have been staged at the university.
There is a faculty of 1250 members at the main campus and at regional research stations.


== Campus ==
Punjab Agricultural University (PAU) is in Ludhiana city (Punjab State) in northwest India, 316 km from New Delhi. It is well connected by road and rail with the national capital. Situated on the Ludhiana - Ferozepur Road, the university covers an area of 1,510 acres (6.1 km2) on its main campus and 4,615 acres (18.68 km2) at the regional research stations. Modeled on the pattern of land grant colleges in the United States, the PAU performs the integrated functions of teaching, research and extension in agriculture, agricultural engineering, home science and allied disciplines. The university has well-equipped laboratories, library and lecture rooms and elaborate farm facilities. Accommodation is available in the university hostels for single students. Married students, if accompanied by their family members, have to find accommodation outside the campus.


== Sports ==
Punjab Agricultural University Stadium is a multipurpose stadium located in the campus. The stadium has got facilities for sports like cricket, football, hockey, etc. There is an astroturf field for hockey which is used for hockey event. In addition to this there is a swimming pool and a cycling Velodrome.There are facilities for indoor sports such as basketball, badminton, gymnastics, handball, volleyball, lawn tennis, table tennis, weight lifting and Kabbadi etc. The Ground has also hosted 10 Ranji including a final in 1993 and one Irani Trophy matches from 1987 to 1999 and 10 List A matches.


== Academics ==
The university offers five bachelor's degrees, 51 master's degree and 42 doctorate programmes in 50 departments of five constituent colleges. In addition, it offers a Bachelor of Education program and five Diploma programs in its four constituent colleges:

College of Agriculture
College of Horticulture and Forestry
College of Agricultural Engineering & Technology
College of Home Science
College of Basic Sciences and HumanitiesIn 1988 the university switched from the trimester to semester system and in 1993 it switched from the letter grade system to a 10.00 credit point average system.


== Rankings ==
The National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) ranked Punjab Agricultural University 60 overall in India and 38 among universities in 2018.


== Notable alumni ==
Jaswinder Bhalla
Gurbhajan Gill
Gurdev Khush
Gurmant Grewal
Baldev Singh Dhillon
Adesh Kanwarjit Singh Brar


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website