Reliance Digital TV

Independent TV, formerly Reliance Big TV, was an Indian direct to home (DTH) television operator. It was a subsidiary of Reliance Communications.


== History ==
Fraud
Independent TV originally launched as Reliance Big TV in 19 August 2008. The service acquired 1 million subscribers within 90 days of launch, due to limited competition from other operators in the market. The service was later renamed to Reliance Digital TV. The operator was acquired by Pantel Technologies & Veecon Media in January 2018.In March 2018, the company launched a pre-booking DTH offer. The company took bookings and collected revenue from customers, but the service connections were not installed. After launching the DTH offer, the Pantel Technologies & Veecon Media group rebrand the company as Independent TV.The company was unable to provide installation to customers since their agreement with STAR India group had expired due to nonpayment. On 23 July 2018, Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) requested Star India and Independent TV to enter into a fresh agreement within 4 weeks.The company's service was disrupted after further payments to the Antrix corporation were missed. Independent TV closed its services on 12 June 2019.Independent TV Limited is a DTH Licensee of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (MIB), Govt of India. This license has been renewed on June 19, 2019 for a further period of six (6) months, like for all other DTH licensees in India today, and is valid till Dec 31, 2019. All the conditions precedents defined by MIB, Govt of India, have already been successfully complied with, and acknowledged as of July 5, 2019. The satellite services of the DTH operator are temporarily suspended. Independent TV limited has launched a new go-to-market business drive named “ITV 2.0” for its channel partners, to resume its Business Operations again for consumer acquisition and service delivery.


== See also ==
Direct-to-home television in India


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website