Buena High School (California)

Buena High School (BHS) is a comprehensive public high school located in Ventura, California, United States. Opened in 1961, it is part of the Ventura Unified School District and serves the eastern portion of Ventura.


== Athletics ==
Buena High School athletic teams are nicknamed the Bulldogs. Since 2018, the school has competed in the Pacific View League, a conference affiliated with the CIF Southern Section. Previously, BHS was a long-time member of the Channel League. Buena's main rival is Ventura High School, which serves the western half of the city of Ventura.


=== Girls' basketball ===
Buena High School girls' basketball team is the most successful team in both wins and winning percentage in California history. Joe Vaughan created a basketball culture in the city of Ventura, leading Buena to a record of 765–112 during his tenure at Buena — most victories in California along with best winning percentage. Vaughan led the Buena girls program to two California Interscholastic Federation (CIF) state titles and 14 CIF championship appearances. Vaughan has accumulated numerous individual coaching awards along the way including State Coach of the Year.
In a 40 year span, Buena has won 34 Channel League title. Buena has produced two Parade All Americans, Kelly Greathouse and Courtney Young, along with one McDonald's All American, Courtney LaVere. Alum Teresa Palmisano moves on to play professionally for 12 years, reaching the Euro Cup Finals as well as playing for the Cleveland Rockers of the WNBA. The Buena girls' team have eight undefeated regular seasons, most in California.
As of the 2018-19 academic year, Buena is coached by David Guenther, who has one CIF finals appearance and two state tournament appearances.


== Music department ==
The Buena High School music program dates back to the fall of 1961, when Buena first opened its doors for students. The current band director is James Rumenapp, and the enrollment is as high as 150 musicians. The current choir director is Kevin Downey. Students participating in the Buena Music Department have opportunities to perform in many high-caliber ensembles, including Marching Band, Concert Band, Wind Ensemble, String Orchestra, Beginning Instruments, Studio 'A' Jazz Band, Lab Jazz Ensemble, Winter Percussion Ensemble, and Winter Colorguard.
The "Pride of the Gold Coast" marching band performs routinely at home games as well as in several of the area's marching band competitions. The only high school in the city of Ventura to offer a marching band, Buena makes an appearance in the city's two major parades: the Ventura County Fair Parade and the St. Patrick's Day Parade.
The Buena High School music program has a reputation for excellence. The school's music groups have traveled through 10 of the United States, as well as Canada and Mexico. In 2002, Buena represented the United States at the XIV International Festival of Festive Music in Castellón de la Plana. The marching band also attended the Rose Parade in Pasadena in 1983 with over 200 band members in enrollment.
During the 2012–2013 school year, three music ensembles qualified for regional championships. The "Pride of the Gold Coast" marching band qualified for the Southern California School Band and Orchestra Association (SCSBOA) Championships, placing seventh in the 2A Division. The Winter Percussion Ensemble qualified for the Southern California Percussion Alliance (SCPA) Championships, placing tenth in the Percussion Scholastic A Division. The Winter Colorguard received a Bronze Medal at the Winter Guard Association of Southern California (WGASC) Championships in the Regional AA Division, having been promoted from the Regional A Division at the beginning of the season.
In the 2013–2014 school year, the Winter Percussion Ensemble qualified for the Southern California Percussion Alliance (SCPA) Championships in the Percussion Scholastic Open Division, placing 10th in this higher classification than the previous year. The Winter Colorguard began competition in the Regional AAA Division of the Winter Guard Association of Southern California (WGASC) and was promoted to the Intermediate A division based on their talent. This classification is four levels higher than when the program was re-established in 2013. The Wind Ensemble received a Unanimous Superior Rating at an SCSBOA Concert Festival held at West Ranch High School in the Spring of 2014.
In the 2014–2015 school year, the "Pride of the Gold Coast" grew to 100 members for the first time in many years and donned state-of-the-art uniforms, designed by Stanbury Inc. and funded jointly by the Ventura Unified School District, Buena High School ASB, and the Buena Music Association. During the fall marching band season, the group set a twelve-year high score in the 3A division in SCSBOA competition. The Winter Percussion Ensemble again competed in the Percussion Scholastic Open Division, placing ninth in its third consecutive SCPA finals appearance. The Winter Colorguard was promoted to the Scholastic A division of WGASC, the third promotion in as many years, five classifications higher than the re-establishment of the program in 2013. The Wind Ensemble received a Unanimous Superior rating at an SCSBOA festival held at Santa Susana High School in the spring of 2015.
In the 2015-2016 school year, the marching band qualified for the SCSBOA Championships for the second time in the program's history. The band qualified in first place out of more than thirty 2A division groups and maintained its first-place standing in the finals against eleven other competitors, receiving the first SCSBOA gold medal in the school's history. The final score of 87.3 is the highest score on record for the 2A division in SCSBOA finals competition.


== Drama productions ==
Previous productions include The Nightmare Before Christmas (2004), The Breakfast Club (2005), Moulin Rouge! (2007), To Kill A Mockingbird (2007), and Little Shop of Horrors (2008). The 2008-09 season included Much Ado About Nothing and Beauty and the Beast as well as student directed one-act plays, a musical revue, an annual short film festival, Red Ribbon Week skits, and the annual "Comedy Shop".


== Notable alumni ==
Kelsey (Gerckens) Buttitta, KEYT-TV news anchor and winner of The Amazing Race
Owen Bucey, musician, Army of Freshmen and the Calamity
Kevin Costner, actor and filmmaker (attended but did not graduate)
Troy Dumais, 2012 Olympic diving medalist
Aaron Goldberg, musician and filmmaker, Army of Freshmen
Freddy Keiaho, Super Bowl XLI and Super Bowl XLIV NFL linebacker with the Indianapolis Colts
Ethan Klein, co-creator of YouTube channel h3h3Productions
Brandon Knight, right-handed pitcher for the Nexen Heroes of the Korea Baseball Organization, formerly with the New York Yankees and Mets
Zachary Levi, actor
Sami Whitcomb, basketball player


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Buena Music Department home page
Buena Bulldogs at Home Field Sports