Femizons

Femizon may refer to one of two fictional groups appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.


== Fictional team history ==


=== Earth-712 Femizons ===
The first group to be called Femizons were the women of Femizonia, a gynarchic future world in an alternate timeline where women had become Amazon-like warriors, ruling over male slaves. It was this world that produced Thundra, a recurring enemy, and later ally, of The Thing.


=== Earth-616 Femizons ===
The second group to be called Femizons was a group of all-female supervillains in the Marvel Comics universe. They were enemies mainly for Captain America, and their goal was to conquer Earth and create a utopia where women ruled. Led by Superia, who claimed to be inspired by stories of Thundra's Femizons, the group consisted of a large number of established female criminals and super villainesses.


== Members ==


=== Earth-712 version ===
Princess Lyra -
Syrani -
Thundra -


=== Earth-616 version ===
Anaconda - Member of the Serpent Society and Six Pack. Has the ability to elongate her limbs, has super strength to constrict her enemies, can breathe underwater, and possesses super-regenerative abilities.
Arclight - Member of the Marauders, she is a super-strong woman who creates shockwaves upon physical force.
Asp - Member of the Serpent Society and BAD Girls, Inc., she is a snake-charmer that shoots blasts that cause paralysis.
Battleaxe - A former Grappler. She is a muscular super-strong woman that uses an axe as her weapon of choice.
Black Lotus - An Asian assassin and enemy of Black Widow.
Black Mamba. Member of the Serpent Society and BAD Girls, Inc.. She has the ability to pluck the image of her victim's loved one and use Darkforce to embody that person, eventually suffocating them.
Bombshell - A Hawkeye enemy and expert juggler that uses explosives.
Chimera - A metamorph that can grow wings and claws.
Dansen Macabre - A hypnotist that kills her victims by dancing.
Diamondback - A member of the Serpent Society and BAD Girls, Inc.. She throws diamonds laced with a variety of chemicals (acid, poison). Diamondback is also an ex-girlfriend of Captain America.
Dragonfly - A villainess with flight and hypnotic abilities.
Femme Fatales - A female mercenary team.
Bloodlust - A ferocious member of the Femme Fatales. She has enhanced strength, speed, agility, and senses.
Knockout - A super-strong woman and member of the Femme Fatales.
Mindblast - A member of the Femme Fatales with telekinetic abilities.
Whiplash - A member of the Femme Fatales with whips extending from her gloves.
Ferocia - An Iron Fist villain who was magically-evolved from a K'un-L'un wolf.
Frenzy - A super-strong mutant with steel-hard skin. She has been a member of the Alliance of Evil, Acolytes, and X-Men.
Gladiatrix - A member of the Grapplers and a professional wrestler with super strength.
Golddigger - A Captain America villain that has no super powers, but has athletic and martial arts abilities. She mostly relies on her feminine charm.
Gypsy Moth - A moth-themed villain who has the ability to fly and manipulate various organic objects.
Ice Princess - A villain with the ability to generate and control ice.
Impala - An African javelin thrower and former member of BAD Girls, Inc.
Ion - A Fantastic Four character who projects electromagnetic energy.
Karisma - A Fantastic Four villainess that uses radiation wavelengths to become irresistible to men.
Mysteria - A villainess that uses mist as her weapon.
Pink Pearl - An obese Alpha Flight villain with above-average strength.
Poundcakes - A member of the "Grapplers" that creates tremors with her boots.
Princess Python - A member of the Serpent Society and the Circus of Crime. Has a pet boa constrictor.
Quicksand - A woman with super strength and the ability to turn her body into sand.
Screaming Mimi - A member of the Thunderbolts who had (then) a sonic scream.
Steel Wind - A Ghost Rider villain, a cyborg with enhanced strength and durability.
Titania - Possesses super strength and durability, and is married to the Absorbing Man.
Vapor - A member of the U-Foes who can transform into any gaseous matter.
Vertigo - A member of the Savage Land Mutates and Marauders who can cause nausea and disorientation.
Water Witch - A servant of the Mole Man and member of the Outcasts. She is a woman that can control water.
Whiteout - A Savage Land Mutate with the ability to project beams of light, often blinding her enemies.
Wrangler - A Black Widow villainess that uses cowboy-themed weapons.
Yellowjacket - An initial Avengers enemy and later member of both the Avengers and Guardians of the Galaxy who could shrink her body and also project bioelectric blasts.In the group shot, there are two unidentified members of the Femizons who are briefly shown.


== References ==


== External links ==
Femizons (Earth-616 version) at Marvel Wiki
The original Femizons at Appendix to the Marvel Universe
Superia's Femizons at Appendix to the Marvel Universe