John Galt Day

Civic Holiday is the most widely used name for a public holiday celebrated in most of Canada on the first Monday in August, though it is officially known by that term only by the governments of Nunavut and the Northwest Territories where it is a territorial statutory holiday. The name "Civic" is in reference to municipalities (such as cities, towns, etc.) as this day is not legislatively mandated a public holiday across the country by the Canadian federal government and is often given a different, more specific name by some municipalities.
The holiday is known by a variety of names in other provinces and municipalities, including British Columbia Day in British Columbia, New Brunswick Day in New Brunswick, and Saskatchewan Day in Saskatchewan, where the day is a provincial statutory holiday across each province. The holiday is celebrated as Natal Day in Nova Scotia, in commemoration of the founding of the Halifax–Dartmouth area, and Terry Fox Day in Manitoba, in honour of the nationally renowned Manitoba-born athlete. Despite its special designations in Nova Scotia and Manitoba, the day is not a statutory holiday in those provinces, nor in Prince Edward Island.


== Alberta ==
In 1974 the Government of Alberta, acting through Minister of Culture Dr. Horst A. Schmid, declared the first Monday in August an annual holiday to recognize and celebrate the varied cultural heritage of Albertans, known as "Heritage Day".  This gave rise in 1976 to the Edmonton Heritage Festival, a three-day celebration of food, dance, and handicrafts of cultures from around the world.  Heritage Day has been an "optional" civic holiday, having been downgraded from a statutory holiday following the introduction of Family Day in 1990.


== Saskatchewan ==
An official holiday on the first Monday in August was first proposed in Saskatchewan on March 17, 1975, by Gordon Snyder, Saskatchewan's Minister of Labour. The holiday was already celebrated by businesses across Saskatchewan but Snyder wanted it to be a recognized statutory holiday known as "Saskatchewan Day". His proposal was approved in June of that year and the first Saskatchewan Day was celebrated that August.


== British Columbia ==
In 1974, Surrey MLA Ernie Hall, part of the BC NDP government of Dave Barrett, introduced legislation in the provincial legislature to establish the day as a provincial statutory holiday.


== Ontario ==
The holiday was renamed "Simcoe Day" in Toronto in 1969, in honour of John Graves Simcoe, the first Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada and the leading proponent of the Act Against Slavery, but a motion at the Ontario Municipal Association to extend the name change across Ontario failed. According to a 2005 proclamation this name continues to apply in the present amalgamated city of Toronto.Civic Holiday is now known by one of a number of local appellations such as:

"Colonel By Day" in Ottawa
"George Hamilton Day" in Hamilton
"Joseph Brant Day" in Burlington
"Founders' Day" in Brantford
"McLaughlin Day" in Oshawa
"Alexander Mackenzie Day" in Sarnia
"James Cockburn Day" in Cobourg
"Peter Robinson Day" in Peterborough
"John Galt Day" in Guelph
"Benjamin Vaughan Day" in Vaughanas well as numerous other names in smaller municipalities.
When not given a local name, it is often referred to as "Civic Holiday". Although a work holiday is given to employees of the federal, provincial and many municipal governments (usually by inclusion in the contract with the employees' union), the Government of Ontario has not defined this day as a statutory holiday that all employers must treat as a holiday and it is not mentioned in Ontario's Employment Standards Act nor the Retail Business Holidays Act. Schools are generally already closed, regardless of the holiday's status, because of summer vacation. The Caribbean Cultural Festival, formerly known as Caribana, is held this holiday weekend in Toronto, coinciding with Emancipation Day.


== Quebec, Newfoundland & Labrador, Yukon ==
The first Monday in August is not generally observed as a holiday in Quebec, parts of Newfoundland and Labrador, or Yukon, but replacement summer holidays may be observed as follows:

Quebec observes Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day on 24 June.
In Yukon, Discovery Day is observed on the third Monday of August instead, and commemorates the 1896 discovery of gold in the territory and the start of the Klondike Gold Rush.
In Newfoundland and Labrador, the Shops Closing Act provides for a civic holiday on the date of the Royal St. John's Regatta (usually the first Wednesday of August) in St. John's, the date of the Harbour Grace Regatta (usually the fourth Saturday in July) in Harbour Grace, and a date fixed by the applicable municipal council in all other municipalities. Several of these communities use the first Monday in August as a civic holiday, while others have not selected any date.


== Prince Edward Island ==
The holiday is not an official holiday, although some businesses may close for the day. Additionally, federal workers receive the day off and federal services are closed, but municipal and provincial services and workers have varying decisions made on their status, some choosing to have Gold Cup Parade day off instead. This leads to a drastic mix of openings and closings across the province. The capital city of Charlottetown has its own Natal Day, in early June, which should not be confused with Nova Scotia's Natal Day.


== Nova Scotia ==
Natal Day was first celebrated in Halifax 8 June 1839 to mark the arrival of Governor Edward Cornwallis.  Upon realizing the date of his arrival the day of Natal Day was held 21 June in 1862.  Dartmouth's first natal day was celebrated in August 1895, marking the arrival of the Alderney.  In 1992, the Dartmouth and Halifax Natal days were amalgamated to the first Monday in August.


== See also ==
Public holidays in Canada


== References ==