United Daily News

United Daily News (Chinese: 聯合報; pinyin: Liánhé Bào; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Liân-ha̍p-pò) is a newspaper published in Taiwan in Traditional Chinese. It is considered to support the Pan-Blue Coalition in its editorials.


== History ==
UDN was founded in 1951 by Wang Tiwu as a merger of three newspapers, Popular Daily (全民日報), National (民族報), and the Economic Times (經濟時報). The three newspapers formally merged in 1953. In terms of political orientation, the United Daily News is regarded as taking an editorial line that supports the Pan-blue Coalition. Before Taiwan democratized, it was an opponent of political reform; in the years since Taiwan has democratized, it has advocated policies leading to an incorporation of Taiwan within China.
It is the third biggest newspaper in Taiwan, ranking after the Liberty Times and the Apple Daily.


== Contents ==
UDN was and to some extent still is a place to publish literature in the Lianhe Fukan literary supplement.In terms of editorial style and standards, UDN is one of the most literary of Taiwan's newspapers; the Chinese used is baihua vernacular but heavily incorporating usages from classical wenyan Chinese. Once praised for its high standards, UDN has faced stiff competition in recent years, resulting in lowered readership and less money available for proof-reading.UDN has spawned a group of newspapers, including UDN evening edition and UDN international edition, including an American edition published with the Chinese-American audience in mind.UDN has published The New York Times International Weekly on Mondays since 2004, changed to Tuesdays later on. This 8-page supplement features a selection of English language articles from The New York Times.


== Staff ==
The publisher is currently owned by Wang Tiwu's daughter, Shaw-Lan Wang (王效蘭).
General editors over the years, installed on September 16, the anniversary of UDN's founding.:

Guan Jiemin (關潔民) 1951-
Liu Changping (劉昌平) 1953-
Ma Keren (馬克任) 1964-
Wang Jipu (王繼樸) 1971-
Zhang Zuojin (張作錦) 1975-
Zhao Yuming (趙玉明) 1981-
Liu Guorui (劉國瑞) 1984-
Huang Nian (黃年) 1988-
Hu Litai (胡立台) 1990-
Zhang Yidong (張逸東) 1993-
Shuang Guoning (項國寧) 1996-
Huang Sujuan (黃素娟) 2001-
Lo Kuo-Chun(羅國俊) 2008-
You Mei-Yue (游美月) 2012-
Hsiao Heng-Chien (蕭衡倩) 2016-


== See also ==
Media of Taiwan


== References ==


== Further reading ==
De-Westernizing Media Studies, by Myung-Jin Park, James Curran, Routledge, 2000.