Monash University, Parkville campus

Monash University, Parkville campus is a campus of Monash University, located in Parkville, Victoria, Australia. It is home to the Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, previously known as the Victorian College of Pharmacy. A centre of research and teaching, it is particularly well known for its research in drug development and formulation science, including the discovery and development of the world's first successful anti-influenza drug, Relenza. In international rankings, it is ranked as the number one school of pharmacy and pharmacology in Australia and the equal fourth best in the world alongside King's College London.The campus is made up of 4 buildings, the latest one being first occupied in 2007. The newest, fourth building is primarily a research building, to complement the campus's strong research background. The campus is situated on Royal Parade in the suburb of Parkville around 2 km north of the Melbourne CBD. Royal Parade is home to a number of other research institutions, including the University of Melbourne, the CSIRO's Division of Health Sciences and the Royal Melbourne Hospital. Pharmaceutical company CSL Limited is also based in Parkville.
The campus offers courses in Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Science.Students can also take simultaneous degrees in commerce or engineering at Monash University's Clayton Campus. The campus also offers postgraduate degrees by coursework or research, from graduate diploma through to PhD level.
The campus currently has around 1100 students and around 140 staff. It is planning to expand its teaching to offer a Bachelor of Pharmacy at the University's Malaysia campus, which commenced in 2009 in partnership with the School of Medicine and Health Sciences based at Malaysia campus. The campus is also exploring the possibilities of developing postgraduate pharmacy education at the University's South Africa campus.
The current Dean of the College is Professor Arthur Christopoulos.


== History ==
Monash University Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, previously known as The Victorian College of Pharmacy, is one of the oldest educational institutions in Australia. It was founded in 1881 as the School of the Pharmaceutical Society of Victoria (now Pharmaceutical Society of Australia Victoria branch). After being housed in various places in Melbourne, it moved to its present location in 1960. The move to Parkville was largely funded by the massive private donation of £25,000 by David Cossar. At the time, this was the largest single donation to a pharmacy school in Australian history. In its early years, the College was essentially run as a private institution, with the majority of its funding coming from tuition fees and the donations of benefactors. In 1967, the College reached an agreement with the Federal and State governments for it to receive government financial assistance. In 1974, fees for tertiary education in Australia were abolished, meaning that funding for the College began to be sourced primarily from the Federal Government.
After the introduction of the unified national system of higher education in 1988, known as the Dawkins reforms, it was clear that the College had to combine with a university. Negotiations were started with University of Melbourne, which was seen as the obvious partner, given their close proximity. However, these negotiations collapsed in 1990. The College then began discussions with Monash University, which were successful. The transfer was finalised on 1 July 1992 and became the Faculty of Pharmacy of Monash University. It celebrated its 125th anniversary in 2006. In August 2008, the Victorian College of Pharmacy underwent a name change to reflect its position within Monash, to the Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences.


== Deans and Directors ==
John Kruse (1882–1885)
Cuthbert Blackett (1886) (acting)
Alfred H. Jackson (1886–1889)
Sidney Plowman (1890–1891)
A.T.S. ‘Stan’ Sissons (1920–1962)
Nigel Manning (1963–1978)
Geoffrey Vaughan (1979–1987)
Robert Burnet (1987) (acting)
Colin Raper (1987) (acting)
Tom R. Watson (1988–1991)
Colin Chapman (1991–2006)
Bill Charman (2007–2019)
Arthur Christopoulos (2019–)


== Structure ==
In teaching, the campus now incorporates:

Department of Medicinal Chemistry
Department of Pharmaceutical Biology and Pharmacology
Department of Pharmaceutics
Department of Pharmacy PracticeThe Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences (MIPS) was set up in 2008 to focus on the research aspects within the faculty. The research activities are based on four key discipline-based themes including:

Medicinal Chemistry and Drug Action
Centre for Drug Candidate Optimisation
Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics
Drug Discovery Biology
Centre for Medicine Use and Safety


== Notable alumni ==
The campus's alumni includes graduates who have become well known in fields outside of science, including many politicians and senior public servants, and national leaders such as Weary Dunlop.


== References ==


== External links ==
History of the Victorian College of Pharmacy
Monash University Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences web site


== Books ==
Janette Bomford, Victorian College of Pharmacy: 125 years of history, 1881-2006
H.V. Feehan, Birth of the Victorian College of Pharmacy
Louise Gray and Karen Stephens, Victorian College of Pharmacy: 125 stories for 125 years, 1881-2006
Geoffrey Hutton, The Victorian College of Pharmacy: an observer's view
Victorian College of Pharmacy, The Search for a partner : a history of the amalgamation of the Victorian College of Pharmacy and Monash University