Parks College, Oxford

Parks College is a new constituent college of the University of Oxford in England. The plans for the new graduate college were announced in December 2018. It is the first new Oxbridge college since 1990, when the graduate Kellogg College was established.It will be located in the Science Area on the historic Radcliffe Science Library site. Its name is a reference to its location on Parks Road, Oxford.


== History ==
The establishment of Parks College was approved by a vote in the university  congregation on 7 May 2019.There is a planned initial intake of 50 graduate students in October 2020 and an annual intake of 200 students by October 2022, studying for research degrees and on taught courses. Initially there will be a focus on three interdisciplinary research clusters (Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, Environmental Change, and Cellular Life), which will be increased to six or eight clusters once there is a full complement of graduate students.Professor Lionel Tarassenko (Head of the Department of Engineering Science) has been invited by the Vice-Chancellor Louise Richardson to oversee the development of the college as founding president.


== Building ==
The current Radcliffe Science Library building, located next to the Oxford University Museum of Natural History, consists of three parts:

The Jackson Wing, parallel to South Parks Road, is Grade II listed. Designed by Sir Thomas Jackson it opened in 1901. It is arranged over 3 floors, all above ground.
The Worthington Wing, parallel to Parks Road, was designed as an extension to the Jackson Wing in 1934 by Hubert Worthington. The wing extends to the north of the western end of the Jackson Wing and contains the entrance hall on the ground floor.
The Lankester Room and Main Stack, a two-storey extension under the lawn of the museum, built between 1972 and 1975.Parks College will also consist of the western wing of the Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory and Abbot’s Kitchen.
Completion of the redevelopment of the RSL building is scheduled for the start of the 2021–2022 academic year. Completion of the redevelopment of the western wing of the Inorganic Chemistry Lab (the potential space for the dining hall), Abbot’s Kitchen and connecting spaces is scheduled for the start of the 2022–2023 academic year.The first two cohorts of students will be offered lunch and dining facilities at Linacre College.


== Administration ==
Together with Kellogg and St Cross, Parks is one of only three Oxford colleges without a royal charter. It is officially a society of the university rather than an independent college. The main difference from an independent college is that the governing body only recommends a President, who is then appointed by Council; in other colleges, the head of house is elected and appointed by the governing body directly. For accounting purposes, the societies are considered departments of the university.


== See also ==

University Parks


== References ==


== External links ==
Parks College - University of Oxford