Ganbare!! Robocon

Ganbare!! Robocon (がんばれ!!ロボコン, Ganbare!! Robokon, Do Your Best!! Robocon) is a Japanese tokusatsu comedy family robot television series created by Shotaro Ishinomori and produced by Toei. It ran for 118 episodes from October 4, 1974, to March 25, 1977, on NET TV. The series is rebooted in the 1999 series Moero!! Robocon (燃えろ!!ロボコン, Moero!! Robokon, Burn!! Robocon) that ran from January 31, 1999 (a week after the finale of Tetsuwan Tantei Robotack) to January 23, 2000 (a week before the premiere of Kamen Rider Kuuga).The story follows Robocon, a student of Gantz' Robot Academy who lives amongst humans and aids them as part of his studies. Though Robocon is a screw up, he makes efforts to establish a good image for robots in the eyes of humans they cross paths with.
On December 10th, 1999, Toei released the direct to video movie Moero!! Robocon vs. Ganbare!! Robocon (燃えろ!!ロボコンVSがんばれ!!ロボコン, Moero!! Robokon tai Ganbare!! Robokon) where the Robocon of the 90s meets the original Robocon from the 70s.


== Robots ==

Robocon: A robot who lives amongst humans and aids them as part of his studies at Robot Academy. However, Robocon is a screw-up and is afraid of cockroaches. He can transform into the Robocon Car.
Gantsu Sensei: The robot teacher of Robot Academy who built all his student robots, who he accesses via the Scoring Connecter to check their "study" of the week.
Robobin: A delivery robot who is normal of leisure until he transforms into bike-mode, becoming fast yet impulsive. He always makes sure his deliveries get there on time and takes his job very seriously. Unfortunately, Robocon seems to always be there to mess things up for him somehow getting him a low score in the end.
Robo-P: A policewoman robot who likes to whistle. She has a huge crush on Robocon and is usually distracted from her duties because of it.
Robogeta: Though a weather forecasting robot, his forecast rarely proves right. What he does is throw his slipper into the air and judges the weather from the position it lands in. He always scores low because of this. He later makes friends with Roboboss as the bullies to Robocon.
Robokero: A frog-karaoke robot. He always tries to improve the mood with singing and believes that songs are a good way of cheering people up. He scores decently, but what he does usually isn't sufficient enough to earn a perfect score.
Robomogu: An egg-shaped chef robot who works in a restaurant and serves people delicious food. He's friendly and sociable, but takes his cooking very seriously.
Robodigi: Robodigi is a robot with a large monitor like head with two number digits as eyes (his neutral eyes is the number eight and the line in the middle moves to show sadness/anger) He always speaks politely and is a know it all. He works in a laboratory helping solve complex problems.
Roboboss: He works at a construction site and is physically the most powerful robot in his class. Rash and impulsive, he is always looking for ways to get a perfect score. And once that gets too hard he tries to find ways to ruin everyone else's.
Robin-chan: A robotic ballerina on whom Robocon has a crush. Robin-chan played a major role in the film "Robocon Dai Boken" in which she was kidnapped by space pirates when their leader, the elderly warlock Akuma, wants her as his bride. The original actress who played Robin-chan returned for a cameo in the Heisei version of the show, Moero!! Robocon.


== Cast ==
Shintaro Oyama: Shigehisa Ōno
Hatsue Oyama: Midori Katō
Hajime Oyama: Yoshikazu Yamada
Midori Oyama: Mayumi Sakuma
Makoto Oyama: Nobuyoshi Fukuda
Robin-chan: Kaho Shimada
Yamamoto-sensei: Yukari Yamamoto
Officer Machida: Tōru Yuri
Taro Ogawa: Masahiro Sumiyoshi
Yoshiko Ogawa: Miyuki Ueda
Mayumi Ogawa: Yukiko Ebina
Susumu Ogawa: Makoto Honda


=== Voice Cast ===
Robocon: Keiko Yamamoto
Gantz-sensei: Keiichi Noda
Robogari: Sachiko Chijimatsu
Robopar/Robo Mecha: Kōji Yada
Robowal/Robopu/Robobin: Ichirō Nagai
Robodoro/Roboton: Kenichi Ogata
Roboton: Keaton Yamada
Robosho/Robokiwi/Robochoi: Sanji Hase
Roboton/Robogaki/Robogera: Osamu Katō
Robopecha/Robopyon: Kazuko Sawada
Robowal/Robocar: Yonehiko Kitagawa
Robodeki: Akira Kamiya
Robomero: Junko Hori
Roboinu: Kaneta Kimotsuki/Shun Yashiro
Roboriki: Hiroshi Masuoka
Robopeka: Isamu Tanonaka
Robo-chan: Kazuko Sugiyama


== Theme Songs ==
All songs were sung by Ichirou Mizuki and composed by Shunsuke Kikuchi.

OP 1: Ganbare Robocon, written by Shotaro Ishinomori
OP 2: Oira Robocon Robotto dai! (おいらロボコンロボットだい!) by Shotaro Ishinomori
ED 1: Robocon, Best in the Robot World (ロボコン・ロボット世界一, Robokon Robotto Sekaiichi) written by Saburō Yatsude
ED 2: Robocon Gattsurakon (ロボコンガッツラコン) by Saburō Yatsude
Summer ED: Robocon Ondo (ロボコン音頭) by Saburō Yatsude
Winter ED: Run! Robocon Athletic Meet (走れ!!ロボコン運動会, Hashire! Robokon Undōkai) by Shotaro Ishinomori


== References ==