Hostel

A hostel is a lower-cost form of short-term shared sociable lodging where guests can rent a bed, usually a bunk bed in a dormitory, with shared use of a lounge and sometimes a kitchen. Rooms can be mixed or single-sex and have private or shared bathrooms. Private rooms may also be available, but the property must offer dormitories to be considered a hostel. Hostels are popular forms of lodging for people engaging in backpacker tourism or gap year travelers. They are part of the sharing economy.In the Indian subcontinent and South Africa, hostel also refers to a boarding school or student dormitory in resident colleges and universities.
Each hostel, hostel chain or hostel association, such as Zostel in India or Hostelling International, caters to a niche market of travelers. For example, one hostel might feature in-house social gatherings such as movie nights or communal dinners, another might feature local tours, one might be known for its parties, and another might have a quieter place to relax in serenity, or be located on the beach. Newer hostels focus on a more trendy design interior, some of which are on par with boutique hotels. Some may cater to older digital nomads, global nomads, and perpetual travelers that prefer slightly more upmarket private rooms or generally quieter accommodation. A "boutique hostel" is an often-arbitrary marketing term typically used to describe intimate, luxurious or quirky hostel environments.There are approximately 10,000 hostels in Europe and approximately 300 hostels in the United States. The typical  guest is between 16 and 34 years old.Hostels may provide additional services such as airport shuttle transfers, swimming pools and spas, tour booking and car rental. Some hostels, especially isolated ones, may also offer restaurant service. Washing machines and clothes dryers are often provided for an additional fee. Hostels sometimes have entryways for storing gear. Most hostels offer lockers for safely storing valuables. Some offer yoga studios, cinemas, rooftop clubs, and surf camps. Some bare-bones hostels do not provide linens. Some hostels may have a curfew and daytime lockouts, and some, albeit  few, require occupants to do chores apart from washing and drying up after food preparation.Flashpacking and Poshpacking refer to a form of backpacker tourism involving staying at nicer hostels. The words combine backpacking with flash, a slang term for being fancy, or posh, an informal adjective for upper class.Though very uncommon, a mobile hostel is a hostel with no fixed location. It can exist in the form of a campsite, a temporary building, bus, van, or a short term agreement in a permanent building. Mobile hostels have sprouted up at large festivals where there exists a shortage of budget accommodation. As with regular hostels, mobile hostels generally provide dormitory accommodation for people engaging in backpacker tourism or travelers on a shoestring budget. The first ever commercial example of a mobile hostel is Hostival. It has provided accommodation at Oktoberfest, Carnival, San Fermin, Las Fallas and the 2010 FIFA World Cup.
In some cities, hostels reported a higher average income per room than hotels. For example, in Honolulu, Hawaii, upscale hotels were reportedly making $141 to $173 per room in 2006, while hostel rooms  brought in as much as $200 per night, for rooms of 8 guests paying $25 each. Even during the financial crisis of 2007–2008, many hostels reported increased occupancy numbers in a time when hotel bookings are down.One Australian study has shown that people engaging in backpacker tourism and staying in hostels actually spend more overall than other types of travelers due to their longer stays. People engaging in backpacker tourism in Australia contribute nearly $3.4 billion and stay on average 34.2 nights compared to the 31 nights spent by other travelers. In New Zealand, backpackers hostels had a 13.5% share of accommodation guest/nights in 2007.Although untrue, urban legends have compared hostels to flophouses, homeless shelters or halfway houses.Many hostels are family owned or run, and are often cheaper for both the operator and occupants than hotels. Hostels may have long-term residents who they employ as desk agents or housekeeping staff in exchange for free or discounted lodging.


== Issues related to communal accommodation ==
Guests are advised to use etiquette due to issues with communal accommodation including:
There is less privacy in a hostel than in a hotel. Sharing sleeping accommodations in a dormitory and bathrooms might not be comfortable for those requiring more privacy. However, the shared accommodation makes it easier to meet new people. Some hostels encourage more social interaction between guests due to the shared sleeping areas and communal areas. Lounges typically have sofas and chairs, coffee tables, board games, books or a book exchange, computers, and Internet access.Nearly all hostels have a shared communal kitchen area for the preparation of food and a storage area with refrigerators. Most hostels have a label system to identify the owner of the food. Some hostels will have a labeled "free shelf" where guests can leave unwanted food. Theft of food can happen.Noise can make sleeping difficult, whether from snoring, talking and social activities in the lounge, people staying up to read with the light on, someone either returning late from bars, or leaving early. To mitigate the effects, many guests use earplugs and blindfolds.


== History ==
Richard Schirrmann, a teacher in Germany, opened the first hostel in 1912 in Altena Castle in Altena, North Rhine-Westphalia, with the desire to take his students on field trips into the countryside for fresh air and exposure to nature.By 1932, Germany had more than 2,000 youth hostels recording more than 4.5 million overnights annually. The International Youth Hostel Federation (now Hostelling International) was founded in October 1932. It is now an organization composed of more than 90 hostel associations representing over 4,500 hostels in over 80 countries. These hostels cater more to school-aged children, sometimes through school trips, and families with school-aged children.
In 1936, Franklin D. Roosevelt was honorary president of AYH (now Hostelling International USA). John D. Rockefeller III was a proponent of hostels and was president for several years.During World War II, many hostels in Europe were temporarily shut down.In the 1960s and 1970s, hostelling prospered.The industry declined during the 1970s energy crisis.Hostels continued to grow during the financial crisis of 2007-2008 in part due to their cost appeal.After the Great Recession, the industry grew rapidly in New York City, Rome, Buenos Aires, and Miami. However, a 2010 law curbed the growth of hostels in New York City.


== In popular culture ==
Motion pictures have generally portrayed hostels in two ways:

As fun places for young people to stay
The Journey of Jared Price
A Map for Saturday
As dangerous places where travelers face potential horrors
Hostel
Hostel: Part II
EuroTrip


== See also ==
Airbnb
Boarding house
Guest house
Hostal – a different type of lodging found in Spain and Latin America
Lodging
Pension


== References ==