Fifth Avenue Place (Pittsburgh)

Fifth Avenue Place (originally "Hillman Tower", sometimes called Highmark Place for its major tenant) is a skyscraper in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. United States.
The building was completed on April 14, 1988 and it has 31 floors. Located at the corner of Liberty Avenue and Fifth Avenue, it rises 616 feet (188 m) above Downtown Pittsburgh.  The structure is made up of a unique granite frame for roughly the first 450 feet (140 m), then collapses inward in a pyramidal shape for another 124-foot-tall (38 m) roof structure.  The roof utilizes four prisms clad in granite and encloses a penthouse area that stores the mechanics for the building as well as the cooling towers.  Before Highmark's branding of the top of the tower, there were video screens at the base of the decorative summit of the building.
Protruding from the top of the skyscraper is a 178-foot-tall (54 m) mast manufactured by Meyer Industry of Minnesota. Despite its rounded appearance, the 13-story steel structure is actually 12-sided and measures four feet in diameter. Due to high winds, the mast allows for up to three feet of sway. The height at the top of the mast represents the intended height for the building when it was in development. However, the city decided that that height would not fit in well with the skyline, so the height of the main structure was restricted to what it is today.Crane operator David Angle, the father of future Olympic wrestler and professional wrestler Kurt Angle, was killed in a construction accident during construction of Fifth Avenue Place on August 29, 1984.


== Shopping center ==

There is a shopping center with two floors.


== See also ==
List of tallest buildings in Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Toker, Franklin (2007). Buildings of Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh: Chicago: Society of Architectural Historians; Santa Fe: Center for American Places ; Charlottesville: In association with the University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0-8139-2650-6.


== External links ==
 Media related to Fifth Avenue Place (Pittsburgh) at Wikimedia Commons

Emporis