Black River, Kent County (page does not exist)

Of the thousands of people murdered every year in the United States, several remain unidentified. Many of these individuals remain unidentified for years or even decades after their deaths. Cases include that of Tammy Jo Alexander, who was murdered in 1979 and remained an unidentified decedent until 2015, and Reet Jurvetson, who was murdered in 1969 and whose body remained unidentified for 46 years.Including murder victims and those who died via natural causes or otherwise, approximately 40,000 decedents remain unidentified in the United States.


== Alabama ==


=== Tuscaloosa County Jane Doe ===
Tuscaloosa County Jane Doe was a white female aged between 34 and 38 whose body was found in Slaughter Creek, near the Sipsey River in Romulus, Tuscaloosa County on April 18, 1982. She had been beaten and sexually assaulted, strangulation being the cause of death.She was 5 feet 4 inches tall, weighed approximately 110 to 115 pounds, had a ruddy complexion (indicating that she regularly engaged in outdoor activity), wore an upper partial denture and had dark-brown, shoulder-length hair and brown eyes. She also had a visible scar beneath her right eyebrow. This decedent wore tennis shoes, knitted blue pants, a long-sleeved blue shirt, and white undergarments.
It is possible that she was fishing at the area and was killed at the scene, as disturbances upon the earth were discovered at the location of her discovery. Moreover, she may have given birth to at least one child in her lifetime, and her body showed evidence of her having performed manual labor. Her remains were exhumed in 2013 both for additional examination and to obtain a DNA sample.


=== Opelika Jane Doe ===

The skull of a girl of African heritage was discovered on January 28, 2012, in Opelika, Alabama. Several other bones of this decedent were also subsequently recovered. The victim was concealed in the woods near a trailer park. Examiners concluded that she was between four and seven years old at the time of her death and had black hair. She is also presumed to have been "abused and malnourished" while alive and her death is presumed to be murder. Her height, weight and eye color could not be determined because of the advanced state of decomposition of her remains. The girl had likely died between 2011 and 2012. The victim has since been forensically reconstructed by the FBI Victims Identification Project and currently has her DNA being processed to compare to potential matches.In 2016, the facial features of Opelika Jane Doe were forensically reconstructed by the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Subsequently, the photographs of an unidentified child seen at a vacation bible school in 2011 were linked with her. The child seen alive appeared to be neglected and could have suffered abuse, as she had visible damage to one of her eyes.


== Alaska ==


=== "One-Eyed Jack" ===

On August 20, 1979, the skeletal remains of a man were discovered in Tok, Alaska. The decedent had apparently hitchhiked to Alaska in 1978 with another man and was then murdered by his companion. He was 6 feet tall, weighed approximately 185 pounds, and was less than 40 years old when he was murdered. The man's left eye was missing, and he wore a distinctive leather eye patch, which may play a crucial role in his future identification. Another feature pertaining to his identity is that he had long brown hair worn with a headband.The likeness of One Eyed Jack was created by police sketch artist Carl Koppelman. The image is based on only the cranium, as the victim's lower jaw was not recovered.


=== "Eklutna Annie" ===

Eklutna Annie is a young white female (with possible Native American heritage) whose body was discovered on July 21, 1980, in Eklutna, Anchorage, Alaska. This decedent is believed to have been in her late teens or early twenties at the time of her murder.Serial killer Robert Hansen confessed to murdering this woman, claiming she was either a prostitute or a dancer whom he stabbed in the back as she attempted to escape from his vehicle in late 1979.


=== "Horseshoe Harriet" ===
The remains of a woman were found on April 25, 1984, near Horseshoe Lake in Palmer, Alaska. She had been stabbed and shot. Like Eklutna Annie, she is believed to have been a victim of serial killer Robert Hansen's; Hansen led police to her body."Horseshoe Harriet" was between 5 feet 2 inches and 5 feet 6 inches tall. She was most likely between the ages of 19 and 20 when she was murdered. Along with her remains were found a scarf, coat, brassiere, tennis shoes, a sweater, jeans, socks, and leg warmers. Other items found were cigarettes, a comb, a compact, and condoms. Her remains were exhumed in 2014 for additional forensic examination.


== Arizona ==


=== "Little Miss X" ===

The skeletonized remains of a girl, nicknamed "Little Miss X," were found on a desolate road 10 miles southeast of the Grand Canyon in Coconino County, Arizona on October 31, 1958. Although no cause of death could be determined, the case has always been considered a homicide.The girl was a white American with possible Hispanic or Latino ancestry; she's estimated to have been between 11 and 14 years old at the time of her death. She was between 5 ft and 5 ft 3 in (150 and 160 cm) in height. It was determined that she had died 9–14 months before her bones were found.The victim had received good dental care during her life, having seven fillings in four of her teeth. Her hair had been dyed a lighter brown from its natural dark brown. Many of the victim's personal items were at the scene as well: a 10-karat-gold chain; a small jar of Pond's cold cream; a white nylon comb; a small white powder puff with traces of sun-tan-colored powder; and a small blue plastic nail file case with an indented letter "P" and a hand-printed capital "R" next to it.No clothing was found on the victim's body. However, a white wool cardigan short-sleeved sweater, a white cotton size 34C bra, and brown Capri pants with a green-and-red-plaid design were found at the scene. Investigators deduced the victim had been stripped naked prior to, or shortly after, being killed. A pair of white panties was also found, although they appeared to be too large for the victim.Her body was exhumed in 1962 for further examination. However, due to poor recordkeeping, no records exist indicating her re-burial site. The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children has since released a facial reconstruction image of her.


=== "Little Miss Nobody" ===

The partially buried body of a female child was discovered by a schoolteacher in Congress, Arizona on July 31, 1960. Investigators determined via evident disturbances in the sand close to the actual burial site that whomever had buried the child had initially made several attempts to dig a deeper grave to conceal her remains.
A forensic pathologist would determine that the body was that of a white girl between the ages of two and seven years old at the time of her death, with her most likely age being between three and six years old. The girl's toenails and fingernails were painted a bright red, and her hair was dyed auburn.A local radio host named this decedent "Little Miss Nobody." He would also initiate a local campaign to raise funds for the child's burial. More than 70 people attended the subsequent service. Although this child's DNA has been uploaded to national databases of missing persons, she has never been identified.


=== "Valentine Sally" ===

The body of a white female, aged between 15 and 24, was discovered under a cedar tree in Williams, Coconino County, on February 14, 1982. She was discovered approximately 25 feet from Westbound Interstate 40.
Her death had occurred on or around February 1, and the area of her discovery area was a place where trucks were known to have regularly pulled over to cool their brakes. Because these remains were located on Valentine's Day, the victim was nicknamed "Valentine Sally."
Valentine Sally was approximately five feet five inches in height and weighed 120 pounds; she had blue eyes and strawberry blond hair which was straight and approximately ten inches in length. Distinctive marks upon her body were scars upon her right thigh and her left foot. Furthermore, the decedent appeared to have incomplete root canal surgery upon one of her molars, which may have been related to a notably discomforting infection. This surgery had been performed approximately one week prior to her murder. She also wore an earring in her left ear. It is unknown if her right ear was also pierced, as her right ear was not recovered. Due to decomposition and the activity of scavenging animals, her fingerprints could not be obtained (although her DNA and dental charts were).The victim had been murdered by either suffocation or strangulation and wore Seasons brand jeans with a handkerchief in one pocket. A distinctive white sweater with thin red stripes and a bra were also found near her remains, which may have also belonged to the victim.
It is possible Valentine Sally had been seen by eyewitnesses at a truck stop in Ash Fork, Arizona in early February, as a waitress at a truck stop named Patty Wilkins recalled a young girl matching her description and aged 16 or 17 who had asked her for aspirin because of a tooth ache. This girl did not want any food. She was in the company of an older male—possibly a father or uncle—who had expressed concern over her teeth. Wilkins believed the girl was with a relative as normally, had a runaway entered the premises, she would call the sheriff. The pair had entered the premises at 3 a.m. and left approximately one hour later.


== Arkansas ==


=== El Dorado Jane Doe ===

A woman estimated to be anywhere between 18 and 30 years of age was found deceased on July 10, 1991, in El Dorado, Arkansas in Room 121 of the Whitehall Motel. The decedent is known to have used multiple names, including Cheryl Ann Wick (which she used from a stolen identification card), Kelly Carr/Karr, Shannon Wiley, and Mercedes. She was known to have lived in various states prior to her death, including Texas, where she apparently worked as a sex worker. Other reports explain she had been arrested in the past, using several of her aliases and had possibly been involved in a bank robbery on the East Coast. She had been shot to death by her boyfriend who was convicted of her murder, although the woman remains unidentified.A second cousin of the victim living in Alabama was identified by a genealogist using genetic genealogy after uploading the unidentified woman's autosomal DNA to the GEDmatch database. The cousin did not recognize the victim but stated she resembled members of the family.


=== Benton County John Doe ===
The decomposed remains of a man were discovered in the Beaver Lake in Rogers, Benton County, Arkansas on October 16, 1996. His body was concealed in a sleeping bag which had floated to the surface, possibly after breaking loose from whatever tethers may have been weighing his body beneath water. He was a white male aged between 30 and 60 years old, standing at five feet nine inches to five feet eleven inches tall, with a case of myositis ossificans on one of his arms. He may have been subjected to heavy labor in life, possibly being a logger or a weight lifter. His teeth had been stained, perhaps from coffee or tobacco use. He had at least one tooth removed along with having one filling; his front teeth showed a large amount of wear. He had suffered a blow to the forehead with a blunt instrument, and had died as early as 1995. Along with the sleeping bag, two pillows were found that belonged to a medical center and the deteriorated remnants of boxer shorts and one sock were worn by the decedent.


=== Pulaski County Jane Doe ===

The skeleton of a black woman between 18 and 40 years of age was discovered in Little Rock, Pulaski County, Arkansas on August 18, 2002. She had been shot in the head and was hidden underneath a pile of insulation. She wore several articles of clothing, some which were designed for men. Several pennies and a dollar bill were found in the pockets of her shirt and windbreaker pants. Her nose had been broken and her septum was reportedly slanted to the left side. Multiple ribs had previously healed from fractures.


== California ==


== Colorado ==


=== Gilpin County Jane Doe ===

The burned body of a woman was found on September 30, 1952, in a forest near Highway 119 in Blackhawk, Gilpin County, Colorado. The victim had been placed under a log that was set afire after being doused with an accelerant approximately 20 to 30 days before her remains were found. The victim was believed to be aged between 25 and 30 years old at the time of her murder (born between 1922 and 1927), although she may have been as young as 17. Her hair, which was found attached to the skull, is believed to have been dark in color, and she was approximately five feet seven inches tall. Because of the condition of her body, her weight and race are unknown, as her remains had deteriorated to the point that they weighed 14 pounds. One of the legs was severed from the body, which may have been due to animal activity. The victim had an overbite, which has been described as fairly noticeable. Jewelry found at the scene included a necklace with rhinestones and three earrings. Burned clothing was also found; a light blue sequin top, jeans and a shoe were all recovered, but were fragmented. A lipstick container, an electric razor, a purse, and a man's ring were also at the scene. She was believed to have been hit on the head with a bloody stick nearby before being burned, although it is not known if she was killed after the blow. The stick and one of the earrings were later found by a woman who visited the scene after hearing about the case.
The individual who discovered these remains, Charles Damoth, was initially believed by authorities to be the killer, although his daughter believes otherwise. At least five others were ruled out as possible perpetrators. Damoth admitted to finding the body days before reporting the killing, which some have found suspicious. He claimed he also had cut wood in the area, including the log found on her body. One person also stated they had seen Damoth's truck near the scene around the time the victim was estimated to have died. Polygraph tests used on the suspect never revealed additional evidence. This murder is also referred to as the "Pyre Case," and the victim has also been nicknamed "Maria."


=== El Paso County John Doe ===

The skeleton of a male was found on November 3, 1986, a year or less after his death. This five feet five inches in height, 35 to 40-year-old male had been shot and his body also revealed evidence of his having received blunt-force trauma to his face. The remains were located in a field in El Paso County, Colorado. He had brown hair and was wearing a blue-green sweatshirt along with a pair of jeans.


=== "Rainbow Falls Doe" ===
Approximately two to three days after her death, the body of a female aged between 13 and 25 years old (most likely under 20 years of age) was found in Douglas County, Colorado on June 15, 1993. Although she had recently expired, these remains were in an advanced state of decomposition and largely unrecognizable, which made her eye color impossible to distinguish. It is believed that this decedent had died from blunt-force trauma before her body was abandoned in a campsite in the Rainbow Falls Campground (located in the San Isabel National Forest). Her shoulder-length hair—possibly dyed—was blond or light brown in color. She wore a black Harley Davidson shirt and several pieces of jewelry: a yellow metal ring on her pinky finger; a yellow metal necklace with a black crystal pendant; and a necklace depicting hands clasping a tiger's eye crystal ball. Her ears were also pierced, her left contained a stud with a clear stone. Her fingernails had been either cut or chewed very short. She was stocky with large breasts and hips. The girl's body was partially clothed but she had not been raped, although she could still have been molested. It is possible that she may have come to Colorado to a Vietnam Vets motorcycle club convention or may have been a runaway teenager from Louisiana.
Rainbow Falls Doe was between five feet six to five feet eight inches in height, and weighed 140 pounds, as she was of a stocky build. The victim had had her spleen removed in life, which left a visible vertical scar upon her abdomen. She had very healthy teeth. Two wisdom teeth were removed and two teeth were impacted. There is evidence that at some stage in her life she was very well cared for. She was in good health.
She is buried at Cedar Hill Cemetery in Castle Rock, Colorado.


=== Saguache County John Doe ===

The body of a male was discovered on October 12, 2002, in Saguache, Saguache County, Colorado. He had been shot in the head twice at a minimal distance and left in a ravine. He had been wrapped in a handmade, antique quilt, and wrapped again in black plastic secured with duct tape. He is believed to have been asleep when killed. The victim was six feet five inches tall and was estimated to weigh between 235 and 240 pounds. Although he was toothless, no dentures were found at the scene of his discovery. He was estimated to have been between the ages of 30 and 40. He wore a motorcycle jacket with the words "Fort Washington, Maryland" and black shorts. It is possible that he was attending a motorcycle-related gathering at the time of his death.


== Connecticut ==


=== New Haven County John Doe ===
On August 9, 1923, the badly decomposed remains of an unknown male were found on Milford Townpike in West Haven near the New Haven County Home. This John Doe was estimated to be approximately 27 years old, had brown hair and stood at 5 feet 7 inches. He weighed approximately 150 pounds. The decedent wore a brown striped suit and under one arm had a chauffeur's cap. He had a cloth gag in his mouth and there appeared to be two bullet wounds in his chest, but he was apparently killed by strangulation. This individual was possibly killed by serial killer Carl Panzram. He was one of the few victims of Panzram that can be confirmed. It is alleged that the victim may have been approximately 16 years old and either the nephew or son of a New York Policeman.


=== New Haven County Jane Doe ===

On August 16, 1975, the body of a white female between 18 and 28 years of age was discovered in East Haven, New Haven County, Connecticut. The victim was bound and gagged, nude, and floating in a drainage ditch behind a building. This woman was killed by strangulation at least five days prior to her discovery, although her face was recognizable. Antenna wires were visible around her neck, waist and legs and her body was wrapped in a tarp, which had been secured with an electrical cord. It is believed that the decedent was not murdered at the location where her body was discovered. The victim was around five feet six inches in height and weighed approximately 125 pounds. She had dark brown hair and either hazel or brown eyes. She may have undergone rhinoplasty. This may be a contributing factor for this woman remaining unidentified, as those who knew her in life before this possible surgery would be less likely to recognize the constructed facial composite released to the public.
This decedent may also have worn braces at one point in her life and had both ears pierced; she wore silver-colored earrings. No evidence of her murderer was left behind, save for white spots of paint discovered upon the tarp used to conceal her body. Her murder could possibly be linked to that of a man who was murdered and disposed of in a similar manner, as well as serial killings in the area. She is buried in an unmarked grave in the State Street Cemetery in Hamden, Connecticut.


== Delaware ==


=== New Castle County Jane Doe ===

A possible victim of serial killer Henry Lee Lucas was found in a field in Townsend, New Castle County, Delaware on June 27, 1977. Examination of the bones concluded that she was a middle aged woman, the mother of approximately two children and had various dental problems, as well as a spinal condition, at the age of thirty-three to sixty-three. Her dental problems may have been due to smoking, as a large amount of tar was found in her mouth, which also had a removable plate and many fillings. Despite the various types of dental work, the quality of the procedures was of fairly low quality. One of the bones of one of her right fingers was broken, possibly from defending herself from the killer. She may have been native to Michigan, which has led investigators to believe that Lucas had been involved, as he had given statements in prison describing a similar crime scene as well as claiming he had murdered a Michigan woman in the same area.
The woman's DNA profile was analyzed by the Parabon NanoLabs in 2018. Traits such as blue eyes, a fair complexion and Northern European ancestry were suggested by their examination. A computer generated image was also produced, depicting an approximation of the woman at age 48.


=== Odessa Jane Doe ===

The skeleton of a woman aged between 20 and 35 (although this decedent may have been up to 45 years in age) was found on November 25, 1993, in Odessa, New Castle County, Delaware. The body had been left in the William J. Baxter Memorial Park, approximately three months before it was found. The woman had very healthy teeth that showed no signs of staining, although there was evidence of some crowding at the back of her mouth.
This decedent was white with a possible Hispanic ethnicity, approximately five feet one to five feet two inches tall, but because of the state of the remains, the weight was not possible to estimate. Her hair was a dark brown. After examining the pelvis, it was concluded that she may have given birth at one time. The cause of her death was not apparent, but is believed to have been foul play. Most of the bones from the digits of her hands and feet were not found, along with two other types of bones. No clothing was found at the site and thirteen people have been excluded as possibly identities of the victim.


=== Kent County Jane Doe ===
On July 20, 1997, the skeleton of a brown-haired woman was found by a hiker in an area hidden by trees in Camden, Kent County, Delaware, near the border of Maryland. It is believed that the woman had been killed by blows to the head, as damage to her skull suggested. She was of middle age, between forty and fifty-five, although she may have been up to sixty at the time of the murder. The victim was white, between five feet three to five feet eight inches tall and weighed approximately 120 pounds. The victim had likely broken her wrist at one point during her life, which had happened long before she died. Other bones also showed evidence of previous injury and her knees also indicated she could have suffered from arthritis. She wore a denture on the top of her mouth; one of the eyeteeth were missing. The victim was found wearing nothing but a blue hair clip and a watch. Due to injuries that occurred before death, the way the woman walked may have been affected by damage to the bones in one of the legs. Her body was at the scene for three months to two years.


=== New Castle County John Doe ===

On October 17, 1994, a Hispanic man's body was found in New Castle County, Delaware, near a wooded area next to a road. The cause of his death was not apparent, but because his body was concealed in a sheet, authorities presume he was murdered. The body was discovered by a truck driver who noticed a screw and a glove on the side of the road and then inspected a suspicious bundle nearby. He was 138 pounds and five feet five inches tall at the estimated age range of twenty-five to thirty-five years of age.
The man was described as being "well groomed" and had neat dark hair and a mustache and manicured nails and healthy teeth. He had a large amount of body hair, which was shaved under the arms and in the pubic region. It is believed that he was of Central-American descent. He wore a grayish shirt, large dark shorts underneath khakis with a brown belt, white socks, underwear and no shoes. He carried fifteen single dollars along with a nickel, which were created across the United States.


== Florida ==


== Georgia ==


=== Fulton County Jane Doe ===

On January 13, 1988, in Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, a woman between thirty and forty was discovered alive, after suffering an injury to the head, which was believed to have been committed by another person within hours of her discovery. She lived for five additional days until she died at a local hospital. She had the word "Jesus'" tattooed to her right hand. She was between five feet and five feet two inches and weighed 105 pounds. The victim had strawberry blond hair that was nearly one foot long and green eyes. Three scars were found on her abdomen, possibly from surgery and another was found on her right arm. She had received some dental care, as gold crowns were found on two of her molars. The woman wore a brown coat, thermal underwear, panties, a gray vest, jeans, pajamas and tennis shoes. Along with these, she wore a watch.


=== Jenkins County Jane Doe ===

A teenage female of Asian or mixed Caucasian and Asian descent was discovered in a dumpster on February 14, 1988, in Millen, Jenkins County, Georgia. The body was concealed by plastic, which was then duct taped and placed inside of a duffel bag. The victim had died of asphyxiation, and her body was not discovered until between four and seven days after her death.
Examiners concluded the decedent was between five feet five and five feet six inches in height; she weighed between 135 and 140 pounds and had long brown hair. In addition to having visibly crooked teeth, she had her left wisdom tooth missing, although all her teeth were apparently well-cared for. In addition, one of her molars had been removed shortly before she was murdered.The age range of the Jenkins County Jane Doe at the time of her death is determined to have been between 16 and 25. Along with her body, some bedding material was also found.


=== Rising Fawn Jane Doe ===

The Rising Fawn Jane Doe is the name given to a Caucasian girl (also known as Pamela Doe) between sixteen and twenty-five whose remains were discovered in Rising Fawn, Dade County, Georgia, on December 16, 1988, near the state border with Alabama. The victim was around five feet seven inches, weighing between 120 and 125 pounds. Her hair was reddish with frosted ends, and she had dark eyes. She had been both strangled and sexually abused. The clothing the victim wore included a large dark blue pullover shirt, jeans and black shoes. She wore two pieces of jewelry, a gold necklace and a ring with gold heart-shaped design on her left hand. She may have been a runaway or a hitchhiker.


== Idaho ==


=== Snake River John Doe ===

The body of a white male was discovered in the Snake River, near Lewiston, Nez Perce County, Idaho on July 26, 1982, after his death, which was two to three weeks prior. The Doe Network gives a longer estimated time of death to have been as early as January 1982. He was killed by two gunshots from a .38 caliber Smith & Wesson gun, which was not built since 1967. The wounds were to both the neck and shoulder of the man, who was between eighteen and twenty, although the National Missing and Unidentified Persons System reports that his age was not possible to estimate, increasing his age range to ninety-nine years old. The Nez Perce County sheriff department also gives conflicting information, describing him to be as young as thirteen to twenty. Despite that he may have been deceased for seven months, a scar was found on one of his ankles. However, no tattoos, jewelry or distinct birthmarks could be found. He was believed to be white, but may have been Hispanic, as his hair, which was several inches long, was black or red. His height and weight were estimated to be five feet eleven inches and 145 to 160 pounds, respectively. No dental care was observable in his mouth, as his teeth had been excellently cared for with no cavities. The young man wore jeans, blue, red and white striped swimwear in an American flag design and a white sock with the same colors. His case was reopened by police in 2012.


== Illinois ==


=== John Wayne Gacy victims ===

Six young males out of 33 known victims who were murdered between 1972 and 1978 by serial killer John Wayne Gacy remain unidentified. Their skeletonized bodies were discovered buried upon Gacy's property between December 26, 1978, and March 9, 1979. Due to the advanced state of decomposition, in most instances, the causes of death of the victims could not be discovered (although the vast majority of Gacy's victims were killed by strangulation or asphyxiation).Four of these victims are estimated to have been aged between 14 and 24 years old, whereas two victims are estimated to have been aged between 22 and 32. All of these decedents were Caucasian, and at least four of these victims were murdered in 1976 or 1977, whereas two victims may have been murdered between 1972 and 1975.


=== Wayne Fitzgerrell State Park Jane Doe ===

On January 27, 1993, the severed head of a woman, aged thirty to fifty was discovered in the Wayne Fitzgerrell State Park in Ina, Jefferson County, Illinois. The woman's head may have been thrown from a vehicle, as her head was discovered hanging in brush, close to a road. Because no other parts of her body were found, the height and weight were impossible to determine. Examination of the skull suggested she suffered from wry neck syndrome, which would have caused her head to be in an awkward position when she was alive. This deformity may have been caused from previous trauma, possibly from a car accident. Her hair was a reddish-brown color.


== Indiana ==


=== Floyd County John Doe ===

On Christmas Day, 1977, the body of a black male was found in a culvert in Floyd County, Indiana. He was shot in the head and was believed to have died a day before his discovery. The man was estimated to be between 18 and 25 years old and was six feet tall, with a weight of 155 to 175 pounds. The victim wore a knit cap, a jacket with the letters "E" and "D" on the front pocket, embroidered with red string. He also wore a black shirt, a blue sweatshirt, bluish pants and white tennis shoes. Several of his teeth were also missing. The possibility of his identification is slim, as his DNA, fingerprints, and complete dental records were never taken.


=== Newton County John Does ===

Two young men of different races were found on October 18, 1983, in Lake Village, Newton County, Indiana. Both decedents are confirmed victims of serial killer Larry Eyler.


=== Jasper County John Doe ===

The skeletonized body of a Caucasian male aged between 18 and 26 was discovered in Jasper County, Indiana, on October 15, 1983. The decedent had evidently been stabbed to death. He had shoulder-length, reddish-brown hair, was of a slight build and most likely between 5 ft 6 in and 5 ft 8 in in height. Furthermore, this individual had sustained a fracture to his left femur, which had healed prior to his murder.
A Zippo lighter inscribed with the name Arlene was found close to the decedent's body, and the individual was wearing jeans and a gray hooded sweatshirt at the time of his murder, which is estimated to most likely have occurred sometime in 1982.As with the Newton County John Does, serial killer Larry Eyler confessed before his death in 1994 to killing this individual in addition to twenty other men—four others of whom are still unidentified. Money was raised to bury the remains of this man in a formal, marked grave in 1986. In addition, DNA has been extracted from this decedent for genetic testing against individuals who may be related to him.


== Kansas ==


=== "Miss Molly" ===

A female body was found in a creek off of Interstate 70 in Salina, Saline County, Kansas on January 25, 1986. The victim appeared to have suffered a beating and was then subsequently thrown off a bridge where she drowned approximately two days before her body was found. The victim, nicknamed "Miss Molly," was estimated to be between twenty and thirty-five years of age at the time of death, stood at a height of five feet five inches tall and weighed 125 pounds. The victim wore clothing which originated from France: a bra, bikini style panties, stockings and purple sweatpants. These items were sold in large U.S. cities, or outside of the country. Other items, such as a nylon bag and a pillow case were found near the body, but it is unknown if they were owned by Miss Molly.
This decedent may have possibly carried a child before her death, as she had stretch marks on her stomach. Her hair was brown with blonde highlights. She had gray or blue eyes and several visible scars upon her jaw. She also had an appendectomy, pierced ears and wore false fingernails which were painted red. Her teeth showed signs of some extractions and braces, some of which had taken place recently.


=== Marion County Jane Doe (1987) ===
On September 21, 1987, the body of a woman was found in Marion County, Kansas. She had been bound at the hands and ankles, indicating she died from foul play. The victim was at least 16 years old, but most likely between twenty and thirty years old. Her remains were located behind hay bales and hedges at the side of a road and may have been there for months. A tattoo of a cross was located on her shoulder, although most of her body was skeletonized. She was between five feet six inches and five feet eight inches tall and had brown, four-inch long hair. She was found with healed fractures on her ribs, indicating she had been in some sort of accident months before she died. In 2018 police asked the DNA Doe Project to help identify her.


== Kentucky ==


=== "Mary Eve" ===
On Christmas Eve, 1992, the body of a female infant of possibly mixed race was found in a trash bag in the employee parking lot of Oxmoor Center on Shelbyville Road in Louisville. The mother was never found. A member of the mall's security team posthumously adopted the baby naming her "Mary Eve" because she was found on Christmas Eve.


=== Barren County Doe ===

On August 8, 1989, a blue suitcase containing the skeleton of a toddler was discovered near the Barren River Lake, Glasgow, Barren County, Kentucky. The victim was estimated to have been between two and three years old and its sex was not possible to determine, though some believe that the child was female. The victim, who may have been biracial, had been deceased for one to six months and the case was ruled as a homicide. After it was made public that the body was found, a person who was apparently an attorney requested to police that their client, a woman, would not be charged if she submitted information that she knew about the child. After three calls, the person was never heard from again.


=== Pulaski County Jane Doe (1995) ===
The skeletal remains of a female were found on July 2, 1995, in Nancy, Pulaski County, Kentucky. The woman had been deceased from one to five years and it was determined that her neck had been cut and she also had broken one rib, likely due to the attack that ended her life. The victim's skull was accidentally discovered, which led to the eventual police recovery of the remaining pieces of the victim's body which included straight brown hair and some articles of clothing. Examination indicated the victim was a white female between twenty-four and forty-five and most likely suffered from a condition impairing the synovial joints in her wrists. The victim was between five feet one and five feet three inches tall at an indeterminable weight. She was found with a spandex top, a denim skirt and white shoes.


== Louisiana ==


=== Slidell Jane Doe ===
On June 19, 1986, the body of a white female aged between 20 and 30 was found in Slidell, Saint Tammany Parish, Louisiana, in Lake Pontchartrain. She had been murdered around one to two days prior to her discovery, and her body had already begun to decompose. The cause of her death was ruled to be a combination of asphyxiation and stabbing, as wounds were visible on her face. Her hair was either a light brown or red, which was shoulder length. She also had freckles and had received breast implants. It is believed this decedent had been married, as her left ring finger showed that a ring had been worn at one time, but had been recently removed, likely by her killer. She was also three months pregnant.
The decedent was of a petite stature, standing at five feet two to four inches, and weighed an estimated 126 pounds. Her body was nude with a plastic bag that had been placed over her head and a weight was tied to her neck to ensure her remains would not surface.
After her autopsy, examiners concluded that the victim may have been involved in an automobile accident prior to her murder, as evidence on her hips showed signs of healed fractures. It was also possible that a rhinoplasty was performed on her nose, which may have been due to the same reason. Scars were also found upon her abdomen, her knee and one wrist. Her teeth were excellently cared for, although some were possibly congenitally missing and all of her wisdom teeth had been removed.


=== Beauregard Parish John Doe ===
The body of a man of African heritage, 25 to 40 years old, was found on January 4, 1993 in Bancroft, Beauregard Parish, Louisiana. Examiners believe he had been killed within three to four weeks before, as the state of decomposition was severe in some areas of the body, resulting in partial skeletonization. His remains were disposed of in the woods, located in proximity to Highway 389. He wore tan shoes, blue jeans, had short hair and very healthy teeth and had broken his nose once in his life. He had been shot twice in the head.


=== St. Tammany Parish John Doe (2016) ===
The partially dismembered body of a White and Middle Eastern male aged 65 or older was discovered in St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana on July 29, 2016. The victim had died about three days before and was dumped at the scene following his murder. His body was in an advanced stage of decomposition. A scar, possibly from an open heart surgery was present on his chest. His height was estimated to be about 5'10. His arms and one leg were removed, possibly to conceal unique tattoos or marks on his body. Investigators were unsure of certain traits the man had until DNA phenotyping was performed by the Parabon NanoLabs. The results indicated he had brown or hazel eyes, dark brown hair and a fair complexion. The victim or the individuals responsible for his death may have links to the Mississippi Gulf Coast and the victim himself may have been a transient.
In 2018 the DNA Doe Project took on this case and analyzed his DNA to try to match with potential relatives.


== Maine ==


=== Aroostook County Jane Doe ===
The body of a full-term baby girl with an attached umbilical cord was found December 7, 1985, in Frenchville, Maine. Her body was found by a dog, which then brought it to its owners. The infant had died of exposure within a half hour of her birth, due to extremely cold temperatures. She had been abandoned in a gravel pit. Examiners determined that the dog had not caused injury to the baby.
At the location, several bloody footprints were found, believed to have been left there by the infant's mother. Investigators suspect the baby's mother may be Canadian.


== Maryland ==


=== Woodlawn Jane Doe ===


=== "Cheerleader in the Trunk" ===

On August 24, 1982, the skeletonized remains of a young woman were discovered concealed inside a footlocker in Frederick, Maryland by two hikers. The decedent is estimated to have died between 1972 and 1982, with pathologists determining she had most likely died at least three years prior to the discovery of her body. Her age is estimated to have been anywhere between 17 and 45 years old, although the most likely age range of this decedent is between 18 and 25 years old. She had medium length, brown or reddish brown hair and is estimated to have stood between five feet two inches and five feet six inches in height.
Evidence such as spondylolysis upon her bones indicates that she may have been a gymnast or dance performer in life. She had also received extensive dental work on her teeth. Between the 1980s and 2012, three composites were created. Many leads have surfaced, including ten missing persons that have been ruled out in the case.


=== Harford County John Doe ===
The body of an Asian male, aged between 20 and 30, was located on January 9, 1987, in Abingdon, Harford County. He was murdered just days prior to the discovery of his body and had been killed by a gunshot wound to the chest. His body was abandoned at the side of a highway and was bound, wrapped in plastic and then covered with a sheet. He was around five feet five to five feet seven inches in height and weighed approximately 134 pounds. The man had several scars on his face, one near his upper lip and four on the top of his head, which had healed. The victim had black, straight hair and brown eyes. He wore a pair of reddish and white nylon swim trunks that had a blue stripe and brown lining.By studying the teeth of the decedent (which displayed no signs of dental care) it is presumed that he had a habit of using tobacco products. His case has been published in Asian media, which has not yet produced any more clues to his identity or killer.


=== Frederick County Jane Doe ===
The remains of a female aged between 16 and 25, known as Maryland's Unknown Child, was discovered on July 31, 1991, in Frederick County, Maryland, near a truck stop. The remains were badly decomposed to the point where the cause of death was not able to be determined. She was located underneath an overpass, which suggests being disposed of after a murder. The victim was between five feet and five feet two inches tall, weighing 110-120 pounds. The hair was described to be dark and wavy and a tooth protruded from her upper set of teeth. A tank top and several pieces of jewelry were found on her arms, hands, neck and ankle. A silver and gold colored wristwatch was also worn by the girl.
Four forensic facial reconstructions of the decedent have since been created; each varying strongly from the others. It was reported that a man convicted of the murder of a woman native to Ohio in Tennessee, who was a trucker, may have been involved. At his house, authorities discovered shoes and underwear, two types of clothing that the Frederick County Jane Doe was not wearing.


=== Prince George's County Jane Doe ===
The body of a female of African heritage was located in a creek in Clinton, Prince George's County, on March 25, 2000. The victim was between 13 and 35 years old at the time of her death, with her most likely age range being between 15 and 30. She is estimated to have been murdered in 1999 or the year of the discovery of her body.The decedent had been beaten to death, and may have been a victim of a sexual crime, as no clothing below her waist was present upon her body. The female had brown eyes and black hair accompanied with hair extensions which were approximately a foot long. She wore clothing including a whitish undershirt and a similarly-colored T-shirt from a 1995 Special Olympics event held in Connecticut, a white sports bra, a pullover shirt with the phrase "Beefy-T" written on the tag, and a denim jacket. She also wore a Tweety watch and had painted her fingernails purple. Her initials could possibly have been "C.S.," as these initials were found written on the tag of one of her shirts. Although her lower jaw was not found, she did not appear to have received any dental care in life.


=== Prince George's County John Doe ===
On January 30, 2007, the body of a young man of African heritage was located in Seat Pleasant, Prince George's County, Maryland. His hair was cut short and he was five feet ten inches tall and weighed 160 pounds. He wore several layers of clothing: a red sweatshirt with the words "Washington DC" in blue, a dark thermal shirt, a long-sleeved shirt with several colors, a red stocking-style hat, black Air Jordan tennis shoes, a scarf, gloves and two pairs of jeans. He had his left ear pierced and scars were found on his knees and one was found on his abdomen. He had been beaten to death only hours prior to his discovery and was between seventeen and twenty-seven years old.


== Massachusetts ==


=== "Lady of the Dunes" ===

An unidentified woman whose body was discovered on July 26, 1974, in the Race Point Dunes, Provincetown, Massachusetts. She had been murdered by extensive blunt force trauma to the head, and her killer had made several attempts to prevent her body from being identified. Although Hadden Clark has confessed to her murder, many believe this confession to have been false.
Former FBI's Top Ten Most Wanted organized crime boss Whitey Bulger may have a connection to the case.


=== Popes Island Jane Doe ===

In New Bedford, Bristol County, Massachusetts, the body of a woman aged between 30 and 45 years old was recovered from the Popes Island marina on October 30, 1996. The victim had been placed inside two garbage bags and then wrapped in a white and teal-colored blanket. She had suffered a blow to the head and was shot twelve times. By examining the condition of her body, she had been deceased for less than two days and her body had been in the water for less than a day.
The decedent was five feet two inches tall and approximately 127 pounds. The decedent had naturally light brown hair (which was dyed strawberry blond) and had brown eyes. She wore a yellow shirt, a white pullover with rectangular shapes and high heeled boots. She wore a gold ring with an emerald stone which experts say comes from Belarus, a part of the old Soviet Union. She had also received dental work that is believed to have been performed outside of the country. However, one instance of root canal surgery had been performed inside the United States. The woman did not shave beneath her arms or shave her legs, also indicating she was likely European.
Because of the lack of identification and fingerprint matches, the woman may have entered the United States without documentation.


=== Barnstable County John Doe ===

On June 4, 2014, the torso of a man of African heritage was found on a beach in Sandwich, Barnstable County, Massachusetts with his head and all four limbs missing. It is believed that the man was around six feet tall and weighed between 220 and 230 pounds. His body was found on the beach wrapped in a blue tarp and attached to a moving dolly. A surgical scar was also present, but it was unrelated to the murder. Another identifying feature was a T-shirt for a Rhode Island pipe distribution company, although the quantity of the shirts handed out each year prevented easy identification.


== Michigan ==


== Minnesota ==


=== Washington County Jane Doe ===
The severed head of an adult white female was discovered on the shore of Bone Lake in Scandia, Washington County, Minnesota on June 12, 1993. Soon after the head was discovered, a left foot was found in St. Paul, Minnesota, which was twenty miles away. Medical examiners believe that the foot had belonged to the same woman. The foot had fragments of red nail polish. Both cuts made to sever her head and foot had been made cleanly, possibly due to the killer having experience with butchering or hunting. Her remains may have been disposed of in the Mississippi River, as both locations where the parts were found are linked to the river.
The woman had short, dark hair, which may have been spiked when she was alive and she also had a short ponytail at the back of her head. The victim had brown eyes and likely wore earrings, as both of her ears were pierced three times. The age of this decedent has been disputed, with some describing her to be as young as twenty; others saying she may have been as old as sixty-five.


== Mississippi ==


=== "Delta Dawn" ===

An infant or toddler found floating in a river in Moss Point, Mississippi in December 1982. She had been partially smothered, then thrown from a bridge into the Escatawpa River by an individual suspected to be her mother. This child had then died of drowning.


=== Desoto County Jane Doe ===

Desoto County Jane Doe is a woman whose body was discovered alongside U.S. Route 78 on February 24, 1985, in Olive Branch, DeSoto County. She is estimated to have been between 20 and 35 at the time of her death and was wearing only a pinkish-orange pullover along with jeans at the time of her discovery. Her shoes were missing, possibly having been retained by her killer. The decedent had unique tattoos of the letters "T.H.C." and "R.E.J." (or possibly "R.E.T.") on her ankles, and had reddish or strawberry-blond hair. Her eyes have been stated to be gray or brown by various sources. The victim was killed by ligature strangulation and had possibly been subjected to a sexual assault.
This decedent is known to have both smoked frequently and to have regularly bitten her nails in life; habits that may assist in leading to her identification. The victim also had a surgical scar on her left arm and other scars on her hand. The woman wore three earrings in each ear and was approximately five feet three inches in height and weighed 110 pounds.


=== Jackson County John Doe (2001) ===
A "middle aged" man's body was found wrapped in carpeting and a blanket along a road in Pascagoula, Jackson County, Mississippi on June 18, 2001. He was of white or Hispanic ethnicity and was estimated to be five feet five to five feet seven inches in height and weighed about 250 pounds. He had brown hair that was cut very short and had some tattoos, including the name "John" upon his chest. He also had an elaborate tattoo of a bird upon his shoulder and the letter "E" or "F" upon the inside of his left arm. The victim also had distinctive scars. One was a crescent shape above his left eye, another on his forehead, on the side of his nose and a possible gunshot scar on one of the wrists.
He was clothed in a white T-shirt, jogging shorts and pants and was murdered about two days before the discovery. The murder of the victim has been solved, as a subject was apprehended in 2004. However, the victim remains unidentified, although he may have been native to Texas.


== Missouri ==


=== St. Charles County Jane Doe ===
The body of a white girl aged two to three years was discovered inside a suitcase that had been thrown into Lake Alton in West Alton, Missouri, in St. Charles County on February 1, 1968. This decedent is also known Jane Doe West Alton.
The child's remains were recovered by two fishermen who had hooked their line on the suitcase, which had been wrapped in blue clothesline and weighted with two 10-pound barbells found inside the suitcase.Distinctive features noted upon her remains were an abnormally large tooth and a scar above one of her eyes. She had long, blond hair, although due to decomposition, her eye color could not be determined. She was approximately 2 feet 8 inches tall and weighed between 35 and 40 pounds. The sole item of clothing upon her remains was a pair of white underwear.The child had been dead for up to one month before her body was discovered. She was identified as a homicide victim, although authorities declined to reveal the precise method used to kill her. She was laid to rest on February 7 in an unmarked grave in the children's section of Oak Grove Cemetery.
After an image of the child was constructed by the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children in September 2015, the body was exhumed on September 24 from her unmarked grave in an effort to obtain a DNA sample. Investigators later announced that the DNA testing conducted upon her remains was unsuccessful. Nonetheless, the exhumation would yield a more accurate estimation of the girl's age at the time of her death. Her skull was studied to create a more accurate composite image of her appearance in life.


=== St. Louis Jane Doe ===

A girl of African heritage whose headless body was found inside an abandoned property in 1983. Her head has never been found.


=== "Grace Doe" ===
The decomposing body of a woman aged between 21 and 31 was found on December 2, 1990, in McDonald County, Missouri. The woman was possibly of mixed ancestry, having characteristics of both white and Native Americans. She had been tied with several different types of rope, her hands behind her back and fastened to one of her legs, which led some to presume she was a victim of rape or another form of sexual assault. One of the ropes was identified to be from a parachute, which may have originated from some sort of military branch. She was possibly killed at the scene, as a witness reported that he "heard a woman scream" around the time the Jane Doe would have died.


=== St. Louis John Doe (1992) ===
On March 7, 1992, the skeleton of a white male aged between 15 and 25 was located in St. Louis, Missouri in an abandoned building that had previously burned down. He was approximately five feet seven to five feet ten inches tall at a weight around 145 pounds. His hair was either blond or brown and was two inches in length. The decedent had received a fracture to his arm that had healed before his death, indicating some sort of injury was sustained when he was alive. His dentition was good and he did have some crooked teeth on the top set; four of his molars were repaired. The clothing he wore included a pink shirt, a white shirt with an embossed logo of Myrtle Beach, a black coat, boxers with stripes, jeans, socks and size eight shoes.The case is considered a homicide, as evidence of numerous stab wounds were discovered on his ribs. He was originally believed to have been a black male as old as forty-five. After his remains were exhumed for additional physical information, his skull was absent and his coffin was subjected to damage. He could have been deceased from the years 1989 to 1992.


=== Vernon County John Doe (2000) ===
In January 2000, the skeletal remains of a white man estimated to be between 26 and 36 years of age were discovered in a remote area of Nevada, Missouri, in Vernon County.
The victim had died of a single gunshot wound to the head. Repeated attempts to identify this decedent have been unsuccessful, and the Vernon County Sheriff's Department has requested the public's help.


== Montana ==


=== "Christy Crystal Creek" ===

On 9 September 1985, a young, possibly Japanese, woman's skeleton was found with two .32 caliber bullets in the skull with no clothing at the scene. Investigators believe she may have died sometime between 1983 and early in 1985.  She stood between 4'10 and 5'2, weighing between 90 and 110 pounds. Examination indicated that she had a history of smoking and had many fillings as well as two root canals. She also had a type of oral surgery which is distinct to Asia's dental techniques, involving the screwing of a dental post into the tooth. It is possible that serial killer and rapist Wayne Nance may be the killer. Due to his death in 1986, he was never tried or convicted of any murder. Two other victims believed to have been killed by Nance are "Debbie Deer Creek" and "Betty Beavertail," later identified as Marcella Bachmann and Devonna Nelson, respectively. He also may have committed the murders of two others prior to the Jane Doe discoveries.


== Nevada ==


=== "Sahara Sue" ===

A young white female with brown eyes and wavy, light brown hair whose body was located in Las Vegas in August 1979. She wore dentures, is estimated to have been aged between 15 and 25 years old, and was 100 to 105 pounds in weight.


=== Arroyo Grande Jane Doe ===

A young woman found stabbed to death in Henderson, Nevada, near Arroyo Grande Boulevard on October 5, 1980. She had died approximately one day before her body was discovered and is estimated to have been aged between 14 and 25.


=== Elko County Jane Doe ===

The nude body of a female, also known as the Shafter Jane Doe, was discovered on November 16, 1993, around six days after her murder had occurred. She was aged between 20 and 35, and had been shot twice: once in the chest region, and once in the back. She had also been beaten. She was five feet eight inches and 144 pounds with brown eyes and pierced ears, although the earrings were missing, possibly being taken by the killer. She also had painted her fingernails pink at one time.After examination, it was determined that she had used both alcohol and marijuana prior to her death, possibly given birth to a child in the past, and had very healthy teeth. Isotope analysis showed her recent place of residence to the city of Afton, Wyoming. Tire tracks near the body indicated that the killer's vehicle was either a pickup truck or a van. The victim had a mole above her right ear and two scars on her lower right leg.


== New Hampshire ==


=== Bedford Jane Doe ===
On October 6, 1971, the body of a woman estimated to be aged between 23 and 37 years old was discovered by a hunter on a logging road in Bedford, Hillsborough County, New Hampshire. A forensic examination did not determine the cause of death, but determined that she had died between one and three months before her body was found. Nonetheless, the victim's death is reported to have been suspicious, as reported by investigators. She was around five feet two to five feet five inches tall, 115 to 130 pounds and wore sandals and red socks on her feet, blue cutoff shorts and a reddish blouse. The woman may have had brown hair, which was incorporated in the first of two facial reconstructions.
In 2006, a second facial reconstruction was created. This decedent is also known as "Juliet Doe."


== New Jersey ==


=== Atlantic County Jane Doe ===

On December 6, 1971, three hunters discovered the skeletonized remains of a white female in woodland in Galloway, New Jersey. Found with the body was a blue polo shirt, white-blue-and-orange striped hip-hugger trousers, brown sandals, white underwear, and a unique, wide leather bracelet with eyelets with a ladies' Westclock brand watch affixed to it (the watch had been manually affixed to this jewelry). The decedent had straight, light brown or auburn hair of approximately shoulder length, although her hair may have actually been a wig, as her hair bore evidence of artificial coloration and had various shades of color with the presence of coloring additive. Also found in her possession was a motel key; this key belonged to a nearby motel on the Garden State Parkway.
The victim was estimated to have been between 12 and 18 years of age, and her cause of death may have been strangulation. Although Atlantic County Jane Doe has a wide age-range of approximation, she was most likely aged 15 or younger at the time of her death. Her height is estimated to be between 5 ft 1 in and 5 ft 4 in (150 and 160 cm), and her weight was likely between 105 and 130 pounds. This decedent's murder is believed to have occurred several months before the discovery of her remains.A distinguishing feature of this decedent is that she had an extra sacral vertebra. Another factor noted was that the victim did not bear any sign of having received dental work in life. However, her teeth bore little evidence of decay, although one of her molars was slightly damaged.


=== Sussex County Jane Doe ===
On June 24, 1980, the skeletal remains of a woman were found in High Point State Park in Sussex County, New Jersey. Her body had been extensively dismembered with a saw, with sections of the body being placed in various trash bags, which had subsequently been disturbed by animals. The bones of her torso were never located.
The victim was between 13 and 20 years old. Her actual race was difficult to determine, but was determined to be white with an unknown admixture, possibly Hispanic. Her height was between 5 feet and 5 feet 2 inches, and she may have been overweight, although her remains were too decomposed to establish an estimation of her precise weight. Her straight, medium-length hair was dark brown, but had been bleached blond.She wore distinctive jeans that had various colors upon one of the legs. Her teeth were also considered unique by examiners, as they were of a distinct shape and although they showed no signs of dental care, were well maintained.


=== "Princess Doe" ===

The body of a teenage girl aged between the ages of 15 and 20 found on July 15, 1982, in Blairstown, New Jersey. Because of numerous factors including significant damage to her face, she remains unidentified. The case has received significant media attention.


=== Gloucester County Jane Doe (1986) ===
The 1986 Gloucester County Jane Doe is the name given to a female infant whose body was found on December 4, 1986, behind a restaurant in Turnersville, Gloucester County, New Jersey. The baby had been smothered to death very shortly after being born, and her body disposed of in a nearby dumpster. She was white, approximately twenty-inches tall and weighed around seven pounds, with dark hair and brown eyes.After the child's murder, she was wrapped in a distinct pink, black and white towel depicting an African landscape and then placed inside of a gray trash bag. The victim herself has been reconstructed and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children have also created an estimation of what her mother may have looked like, although she has never been located.


=== Gloucester County Jane Doe (2004) ===
On March 2, 2004, a woman's remains were found in Logan Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey. She is believed to have been multiracial, as traits from Caucasian, Hispanic and Asian races were found during her autopsy, which led to several reconstructions being made to illustrate her potential likeness. The woman was aged between 18 and 30 when she was murdered by an undetermined cause. The victim had long dark hair with light highlights and was believed to be at a height between four feet eleven to five feet two inches at a weight between 80 and 110 pounds. Her body was partially disrobed and had also been burned, along with evidence that animals had scavenged the body, after it was dumped alongside interstate 295. Her teeth were in natural condition and she also had possibly borne a child during her life. Her clothing consisted of two blue shirts with different colored stripes, black pants and pink panties.


=== Hudson County Jane Doe ===
On October 18, 2007, the body of a black female was discovered in Bayonne, Hudson County, New Jersey. She was believed to be at the age of 16 to 20 years old when she died, although it was initially presumed that she could have been as old as thirty-five. Although the cause of the young woman's death was not discovered, it has been listed as suspicious. It was believed that she had been deceased for approximately three weeks prior to her discovery. Because of this fact, her remains were in an advanced state of decomposition, which may have erased any signs of trauma that she could have endured. In her long, black and braided hair, red and copper-colored extensions were found, which could be a vital clue in determining her identity. The decedent also wore camouflage pants, boy's underwear, a pink halter top and a black bra with red lace. White socks with orange on the toe area with a green teddy bear design on their side were found on her feet and no shoes were reported to have been found. The jewelry found upon the body included a metal body chain was worn around her waist as well as a plastic brown ring on her right thumb. She was between five feet two inches and five feet five inches and weighed between 118 and 138 pounds when she was still alive.Due to decomposition, only partial fingerprints were obtained and the eye color or any possible tattoos or scars could not be determined or found. Her DNA and dental information was obtained. She had some spaces between her upper front teeth, along with one dental filling on one of her back teeth. Because of heavy traffic on the road she was found, her body could have been transported from anywhere in the United States.


== New Mexico ==


=== Guadalupe County Jane Doe ===
On July 11, 1978, a foreman for the New Mexico Highway Department found the body of a young woman along Highway 216. She was five feet and eight inches tall, weighed around 145 pounds, and had blonde hair and blue eyes. Her left ear was pierced three times and her right ear was pierced twice.
She had been shot to death, and serial killer Ronald Lanphear was found to be responsible for her murder. According to Lanphear, he and his girlfriend Diana Geisinger encountered the girl hitchhiking in Perry, Oklahoma, and picked her up. While he did not remember her name, she allegedly said that her July 11 was her seventeenth birthday and she planned to call her mother that day, but she was killed before she could do so. However, NamUs estimates her age to be 25 years old.


=== Doña Ana County Jane Doe ===
On March 10, 1985, the skeleton of a female aged 16 to 20 was discovered by a group of hunters, hidden under plastic and buried in a shallow grave in Doña Ana County, New Mexico. The decedent had died approximately three to six months before her body was discovered. She is believed to have been white and had blonde or light brown hair, which was likely her natural color, as the presence of pubic hair of the same color indicated. She had painted at least two of her fingernails pink and her skeletal structure bore evidence of abnormalities, some specific conditions of which were noted by a forensic anthropologist to be unusual to occur in someone of the subject's age. The remains were clothed in pink undergarments and a white jersey with the letter "W." Some of the supports in the Jane Doe's bra were noted to have separated from the product. She also appeared to have possibly suffered a healed injury to the right side of her nose.
Her height was believed to be between five feet and five feet four inches tall (152–162 cm). Although her weight could not be determined, she was most likely of a slim build.
Authorities determined the girl was a victim of homicide but declined to release details of how she was murdered, as the case is currently open.


=== "Antonio Perez" ===
On October 8, 1994, a man was found shot to death in a hotel room in Hatch, New Mexico. Allegedly, the assailant knocked on the victim's door, and when he opened it, he was shot once in the chest before the killer fled.
The unidentified victim was 5'6," 138 lbs, and was approximately twenty to forty years old. He had brown hair, brown eyes, and wore a mustache. He also had healed, oval-shaped scars on both elbows.

An investigation revealed a possible name of Antonio Perez and a possible birthdate of August 22, 1971, but this has not been confirmed and he remains unidentified.


=== Luna County John Doe ===
A man's mummified corpse was found by electric company workers chained to a telephone pole by the neck on May 27, 1999, near highway 180 in Luna County, New Mexico. The man died approximately six months before. He was approximately five feet eight inches tall with light brown hair and a graying beard. He also had green stitches in his knee. The victim wore an undershirt, a green shirt, jeans, and Nike shoes. The victim was estimated to be between 30 and 50 and was presumed to have been set afire after being chained to the pole, which was burnt halfway. The lighter presumably used to light the fire was found near the man's remains. The chain itself had been fastened with a lock.


== New York ==


== North Carolina ==


=== Hillsborough Jane Doe ===

The decomposed body of a female, estimated to have been deceased for between three and six days, was discovered by construction workers on September 19, 1990, at a location known as "Chapel Hill" in Hillsborough, Orange County, North Carolina. As the remains were found near the New Hope Church Exit, the victim was nicknamed "Hope." The victim was a Caucasian female, aged between 14 and 25—most likely between 18 and 22—at the time of her death. She was found clothed in only a pink shirt decorated with three cartoon-style rabbits, two riding bicycles and one riding a unicycle; a bra; and white socks that were noticeably clean, indicating that she had worn shoes, likely around size six, but they had been removed either before or after death. She was between five feet three and five feet five inches in height and weighed between 110 and 115 pounds. Jewelry on the body included a ring and a bracelet both made from metal.The decedent had shoulder-length brown or strawberry-blond hair with streaks that appeared to have been frosted blond and was cut in layers. She had also undergone surgery to remove her appendix at some point in life, as a scar was noted on her abdomen. Dental cavities were found upon the victim's teeth, yet she had undergone dental treatment in life, as some "restorations" were visible. The victim's wisdom teeth had yet to erupt. Other examinations of the remains indicated she did not appear to have ever broken or fractured a bone, or borne a child.
Days before the remains were found, a female matching the description of the deceased was seen walking along Interstate 85, near the city of Burlington. It is possible that this female was hitchhiking. Damage to the victim's neck indicated she was likely strangled to death. The case was ruled as murder; one which has yet to be solved.


=== "Baby Michael" ===
The body of a newborn male infant was discovered on March 3, 1999, near Fayetteville, Cumberland County, North Carolina. The child was murdered; having received extensive blunt trauma to his head and much of his body. After the child's death, he was placed inside of a distinctive large garbage bag, which had become undone and was covering only his legs at the time of discovery. His umbilical cord and several pubic hairs—likely from his mother—were still present on his body. DNA from the child's mother was also found. The boy's body had been disposed of by being accidentally dropped or thrown from a passing vehicle. This method of body disposal did not cause the damage to the child, as his wounds were considered to have been too severe and had evidently occurred before death. His mother may have been white or Native American (possibly from the Lumbee tribe).
The day prior to the boy's discovery, a pregnant female was observed to have acted unusually after she was informed that she was required to take a test at a hospital. Later that night, a pregnant woman and a man were seen in a truck that was parked close to the area where the body was found.In March 2011, a memorial placed at the location of Baby Michael's discovery was discovered to have been damaged. This desecration may have been caused by one or both of his parents.


=== Sampson County Jane Doe ===

A white female with Hispanic characteristics was discovered on July 20, 1999, approximately two weeks to two months after her death in Dunn, Sampson County, North Carolina. The body was badly deteriorated, but the cause of death was determined to be a stab wound to the neck. The remains were found near a migrant labor camp mainly consisting of Hispanic people, including women.
The victim was aged between 17 and 24 years old, five feet four to five feet seven inches tall, and weighed around 110 pounds. She wore a black spaghetti strap top, blue bra, and green jeans. Sandals and a yellow watch were also found at the scene. She had painted her fingernails blue at one point and had curly reddish hair. She was not likely a smoker and had no dental cavities, although some wear was observed on her lower row of teeth.


== Ohio ==


=== Mad Butcher victims ===

The murders of 12 men and women, only two of whom have ever been identified, taking place in between 1935 and 1938. All of the victims were dismembered.


=== Ottawa County Jane Doe ===
On October 22, 1975, the remains of an unknown woman were found in Ottawa County, Ohio. The body was unclothed, leading officials to suspect foul play after the case was reopened in 2016.The victim had died as a result of drowning and her body lacked any form of trauma to indicate her death was forced. She was aged between 20 and 30 at the time of her death, was about five feet four inches in height and weighed 140 pounds. An examination of her body indicated she may have been pregnant the year before her death. Her hair was a reddish-brown and her eyes were hazel or brown.


== Oklahoma ==


=== "Lime Lady" ===

On April 18, 1980, the mummified corpse of a woman was discovered on the banks of the North Canadian River close to Jones in Oklahoma County, Oklahoma. The presence of three gunshot wounds upon her body clearly indicated her death was a homicide. One of these wounds contained clothing fibers and a dime that had been driven into the body by a .45 caliber bullet. Due to the fact quicklime that had been poured onto her remains in a likely attempt to accelerate decomposition, the woman became known as "Lime Lady". (The quicklime had actually helped preserve her corpse.)
She was between the ages of 18 and 25, five feet six inches tall and weighed approximately 115 to 120 pounds. She had a heart tattoo on her chest as well as an appendectomy scar. It is believed that she may have been murdered by a biker gang earlier in the year or in 1979, although some contemporary reports indicate she may have been deceased for as little as ten days. Multiple facial reconstructions of the decedent have been created, and her DNA was extracted for profiling in 2014. The DNA Doe Project began DNA testing in 2019.


== Oregon ==


=== Oak Grove Jane Doe ===

A woman believed to be aged between 40 and 50 whose dismembered remains were discovered on April 12, 1946. Her remains were subsequently lost by law enforcement.


=== Jackson County John Doe ===
On July 11, 1963, the remains of an infant or toddler were discovered near Ashland, Jackson County, Oregon after one of the blankets he was wrapped in was hooked by a fisherman. His remains were concealed in a blue blanket, a patchwork quilt with several red designs. The bundle was bound by telephone wires and weighed down with metal assayer's molds.The child's autopsy indicated he likely died in the autumn of 1962 and he possibly had Down's syndrome or a similar disability. The exact cause of the child's death was never determined, due to decomposition, but the case is classified as a homicide. His clothing included a red and white-striped long sleeved pullover, gray corduroy trousers which had an elastic waistband and a belt buckle. His footwear were ankle-length socks and white shoes, which may have been from a shoe store in Medford, Oregon. His other clothing may have been from a J. C. Penney store. The child was also found wearing a diaper made of cloth that was secured with pins and plastic pants. His blond or light brown hair was somewhat long, his eyes brown and eight of his teeth had erupted. What is unique about the boy's dentition is that one of his front bottom teeth was split in two, having two roots and an uncommon groove at its top. In efforts to identify the child, examiners took his footprints and compared them to those taken from other children from a local hospital and none apparently matched.


=== Coos County John Doe ===
The skeleton of a man between the ages of 50 and 80 was discovered on August 26, 1972, in Bandon, Coos County, Oregon. The victim had been killed by two gunshots; both were located on the skull, which still contained the bullets.
The victim had died between 1967 and 1969, as the condition of his remains indicated. At the scene, which was near highway 101, three coins and two unfired bullets were found along with the man's clothing and dentures. He wore a hat, socks made from wool, a car key on a ring, a belt and a pair of leather boots which had white soles. It is possible that his dentures may have been from a local establishment serving veterans in 1966, as inscriptions on them indicated. In 2007, the DNA of the "John Doe" was tested against the family members of a missing Idaho man Fred Miller {Missing August 1968}; however there was no match


== Pennsylvania ==


== Rhode Island ==


=== Providence County John Doe ===

The Providence County John Doe is a man whose decomposing body was found floating in a pond on June 18, 1987, in Smithfield, Providence County, Rhode Island. The victim had received 21 stab wounds to his head and chest, possibly inflicted by an ice pick. His body was weighted down by rocks and barbells that were enclosed around his remains with chicken wire. The decedent is believed to have died a week to three weeks before his body surfaced.
A forensic examination of his remains indicated he may have been Hispanic, aged between 25 and 35, with brown hair and brown eyes. He was five feet five inches tall and weighed approximately 122 pounds. The decedent wore a mustache and beard, and his hairline was receding. He was found wearing a black shirt, gray sweatpants and shoes, although he wore no socks.


== South Carolina ==


=== Sumter County Does ===

A young man and woman whose bodies were found on August 9, 1976. Both are believed to have hailed from a wealthy background, possibly in French Canada. Each victim had been shot three times and both had died within 24 hours prior their discovery.


=== Aiken County Jane Does ===
On November 16, 1987, the remains of a mixed-race woman of predominantly African and possibly Asian or East Indian heritage were found in Aiken County, South Carolina. The cause of death was not determined, but the bodies of two homicide victims were found within a half-mile of the same location, one in 1991 and one in 1993. The deceased had a visible overbite and analysis of her hair indicated that she used cocaine. She was estimated to have been dead for between one and five years, and to have been between the ages of 17 and 25 at death. She was between 5 feet 8 and 5 feet 10 inches tall and weighed between 150 and 160 pounds.On January 25, 1993, the body of another unidentified woman was found in the same vicinity. She was aged between twenty-five and thirty-two, between 5 feet 4 and 5 feet 7 inches tall, and died from a stab wound to the back of the neck. Like the previous victim, she had protruding teeth and wore no clothing; unlike the previous victim, her body had been burned. She was estimated to have been dead for around one to three years. Convicted serial killer Henry Louis Wallace has been questioned in relation to these deaths, as he confessed to murdering black women in North and South Carolina in the relevant timeframe. However, no charges have been brought.


=== Beaufort County Jane Doe ===
The body of a Hispanic or biracial woman was found strangled on May 24, 1995, in Yemassee, Beaufort County, South Carolina. Although the body was found laying face down, postmortem lividity indicated that it had been face-up for at least the first twelve hours after death, indicating that some time had passed between the death and disposal of the body. The victim had been between 30 and 35 years old, 5 feet 3 inches (160 cm) tall, and weighed 120 pounds (54 kg); both ears were pierced twice, and two earrings were present in each. She had scars from thyroid surgery and a caesarean birth, and had undergone a hysterectomy. Her hair was naturally brown but was dyed red. The body was nude except for panties.


== Tennessee ==


=== Maury County Jane Doe ===

On February 14, 1975, the virtually skeletonized remains of a black woman between the ages of 15 and 25 years were discovered in Maury County, Tennessee. Her body was found near a highway, leading investigators to believe that she may not have been a native of Tennessee.
An examination of the decedent's body indicated she most likely died six to nine months prior to the discovery of her body, thus making the most likely time of her death in the spring or summer of 1974. She was 5 feet 3 inches to 5 feet 5 inches in height, and weighed between 127 and 137 pounds. She wore a red top decorated with a seashell design, blue pants with a floral design, undergarments, and wedgie shoes. Her hair was black and kinky; her eye color could not be determined. Her autopsy also noted a distinctive dental trait: she had an extra tooth in her upper jaw. The victim had received several bone fractures during her life; two of which were fully healed at the time of her death. The unhealed fractures of the decedent were found in her pelvis and ribs.It is possible the decedent was either the victim of a car accident or had been intentionally run down by a car, as her unhealed bone injuries and the location of her body suggest. The remains of a young dog were also found near her body, but it is not known if she owned the animal.The skull of Maury County Jane Doe was reconstructed by the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children in 2012.


=== Davidson County Jane Doe (1976) ===

The body of a teenage Hispanic or Native American girl was discovered on March 24, 1976, in Nashville, Tennessee. She had died of drowning approximately one day prior to her discovery under unknown, but suspicious circumstances. She was 5 feet 2 inches in height and weighed between 120 and 130 pounds. This girl's age is estimated to be between 14 and 17 years old and she had large breasts for her age and a mole near her left temple. She also had scars on both arms which may have been caused by cigarette burns.
Prior to her death, Davidson County Jane Doe had been seen in the company of another girl who was never located; according to witnesses who had seen the two together, the deceased had called herself a name phonetically sounding like "Sherry" or "Cheryl", and both girls claimed that they had run away from a treatment center in St. Paul, Minnesota, and were heading to Haines City, Florida. Her traveling companion was a white teenage girl with sandy-blonde hair and who wore wire-rimmed glasses.


=== Cheatham County Jane Doe ===


=== Campbell County Jane Doe (1985) ===

On April 3, 1985, the skeletonized partial remains of a young girl were discovered about 200 yards off Big Wheel Gap Road, four miles southwest of Jellico, Tennessee in Campbell County near a strip mine. She was believed to have been dead between one and four years. Her age was estimated between 9 and 15. She was found by a passerby. 
A necklace and bracelet made of plastic buttons were found nearby, as well as a pair of size 5 boots and a few scraps of clothing. These items may or may not belong to her.
Recent forensic analysis of the victim's remains indicated she was not native to the area where she was discovered. The tests showed she was likely born in Florida or central Texas, and had later lived in the Midwest, Rocky Mountain states, the Southwest or the Pacific Coast.


=== Campbell County Jane Doe (1998) ===

The body of a black female was discovered on October 25, 1998. She had received a gunshot wound to the head, several stab wounds and her body also revealed evidence of her having been beaten prior to her death. She was aged between 30 and 40, was five feet six inches in height and weighed 130 pounds. She had died days prior to her discovery.According to her forensic examination, Campbell County Jane Doe had an extra tooth visible on the right side of her mouth and also had several impacted teeth, giving her a distinct smile. Forensic facial reconstructions of this decedent were screened on Good Morning America in 2004 in an attempt to generate leads as to her identity, but no sufficient clues were generated via this initiative.
The woman's body was exhumed in March 2015 to extract DNA from her remains.


=== Davidson County Jane Doe (1998) ===

On March 19, 1998, the body of a white female between the ages of 45 and 55 was discovered in the Cumberland River in Nashville. She had been shot twice in the head approximately one day before her body was located, and her body was dressed in athletic pants, underwear and one Reebok shoe. She wore jewelry, including a gold necklace with a Leo zodiac pendant and two rings; one of which was gold and the other black.The victim was overweight for her height, weighing 167 pounds at her height of five feet two inches. Her teeth had been extensively cared for in life: dental work valued at approximately $10,000 was visible upon her teeth, indicating she likely hailed from a higher socioeconomic class. Her hair was brown with highlights and her eyes were green.A man had been seen in the company of this woman prior to her death inside a store; he had worn the same pendant as she. This individual was never located. In 2011, the decedent's DNA was entered into national forensic databases, although no matches have been made with her remains.


=== Rutherford County Jane Doe ===
The skeleton of a woman of African heritage was discovered on November 14, 2007, in La Vergne, Rutherford County. She had been murdered approximately four months prior to her discovery, and her clothing had been removed. Although the actual cause of Rutherford County Jane Doe's death has not been conclusively determined, her hands and feet had been bound with yard trimmer cords.
This decedent was approximately five feet six inches in height and aged between her mid 20s and mid 30s; her hair was short and brown. Her teeth also revealed she had undergone dental surgery in her lifetime. She wore two bracelets (one of which contained pictures) and a ring.Although this decedent is believed to have been of African heritage, investigators cannot exclude the possibility she may have been biracial.


== Texas ==


== Vermont ==


=== Addison County victims ===
The skeletonized remains of three individuals: a female adult; a male child; and a teenager whose sex remains undetermined, were discovered in Middlebury, Vermont on May 15, 1935. Each victim had been shot in the head between one and three years prior to their discovery. The adult female's DNA showed she may have been the mother of the teenage victim, but testing of the youngest victim was inconclusive. The female was estimated to be aged between 35 and 45; the male child aged between nine and 11, and the teenager between 13 and 15 at the time of his or her death.
At the crime scene, investigators recovered feathers from a pillow and pearl buttons presumed to belong to pajamas. Facial reconstructions of the oldest and youngest victims were created in 2015.


== Virginia ==


=== Fairfax County John Doe ===
On June 13, 1972, the nude body of a boy of African heritage aged between three and six years old was found in Massey Creek, Virginia. The child was four feet tall and weighed just 50 pounds. He had been dead less than 24 hours. The cause of death was determined to be multiple blows to the head.


=== Quantico John Doe ===
On September 19, 1984, the body of an Asian male estimated to be in his mid-20s was discovered in Quantico, Virginia (in Prince William County). The location of his body was, specifically, next to the Joplin Road exit of Interstate 95. His time of death was estimated as approximately 24 hours prior to being found and his cause of death was determined to be homicide by ligature strangulation. His height was 5'2" to 5'3" and he weighed from 100 to 120 pounds. He was wearing a tan, long sleeve dress shirt with thin white stripes in boy's size 6, John Henry brand and boys size 12, Fruit of the Loom briefs. Tattoos on fingers of left hand; middle finger "9"; ring finger "6"; little finger possible "1".


=== Rockbridge County John Doe ===
The decomposing body of a white male was found on May 27, 1987, in Rockbridge County, Virginia. He was estimated to be between 20 and 40 years of age (most likely being aged in his early twenties). The decedent's hair was brown and he was approximately five feet four inches tall. He was presumed to have been nearsighted, as he wore plastic-framed glasses to treat the condition, issued by a Veterans Administration. The decedent's possessions included a switchblade along with a cross necklace, ten dollars and twelve cents, a cassette tape, memo pad, a lighter, and a pen. His clothing included a short-sleeved shirt, blue jeans, white socks with yellow and green stripes, a brown belt with paint-spattering, brown shoes, and a coat.The man had been killed by two gunshot wounds by a man named John Swartz, who has since been convicted of his murder. The victim had allegedly been picked up at a truck stop by Swartz and had informed Swartz his name was Chris.
Swartz had paid the decedent to assist him with unloading cargo, which he then used to buy several items. After Swartz had picked up a second shipment, 'Chris' requested more money along with some of the items in the vehicle, threatening Swartz with the knife he had purchased with his initial payment. This physical threat was accompanied by a verbal threat of informing authorities he had an "unauthorized passenger" inside his vehicle. After he had taken contact information that was later discovered in his pockets, Swartz eventually killed the man and proceeded with his shipment.


=== Fairfax County Jane Doe ===

Construction workers discovered the skeletalized remains of a 26 to 31-year-old woman in a shallow grave in Centreville, Fairfax County on December 6, 1993. The woman had been stabbed to death, most likely in the late 1980s or early 1990s. Multiple articles of clothing were found with her body, as well as a clip-on button earring. In addition, she was wearing dark pink nail polish on her fingernails.
Fairfax County Jane Doe was estimated to be between five feet and five feet three inches in height and had "dark blond to brown hair". The dental care she had received was relatively poor as many of her teeth were in an advanced state of decay. She is presumed to be white, although it is possible that she may have been Hispanic.


== Washington ==


=== Snohomish County Jane Doe ===

Snohomish County Jane Doe is the name given to an unidentified female aged between 15 and 21 who was picked up hitchhiking in August 1977. The man that accepted her request for a ride eventually strangled and shot the victim seven times in the head after she refused to engage in intercourse after the pair had spent the day together. Her decomposed body was discovered five days afterward, on August 14, 1977, in Everett, Washington.
The decedent was determined to be a white female with un-dyed brown, shoulder-length hair. She was five feet ten inches in height and weighed between 150 and 160 pounds. She had a suntan, restorations on her upper front teeth (that protruded somewhat), and appeared to be a smoker, as she had a packet of Marlboro cigarettes in her possession.
In 1979, the man that killed her was convicted of her murder after ballistic testing confirmed that bullets recovered at the scene of her discovery had been fired from his gun. He was released 26 years later.This unidentified decedent is also known as "Precious Doe."


=== Spokane County Jane Doe ===

On June 20, 1984, the nude remains of a woman were found in the Spokane River in Spokane County, Washington. Initially believed to be aged between 16 and 30, a further examination conducted in 1998 indicated that she was actually aged between 16 and 35 years old at the time of her death.The decedent was white, around five feet five inches in height and weighed approximately 130 pounds. She had two prominent moles on her neck, and is known to have suffered from a minor case of spina bifida. She also had a scar on both her left arm and upon one of her knees. Her body was extensively dismembered, with her head, hands and feet being severed from her body. A separate hand was located around the time of the discovery of her torso, but was determined not to have belonged to the decedent. She is known to have borne at least one child during her life.Her head was not located until 1998, which was matched with the DNA of the victim. She had suffered a blow to the face, which had caused fractures to her skull. Additionally, sharp force trauma was found on the side of the head.
Several reconstructions have been created of Spokane County Jane Doe's face.


=== Green River victims ===

On March 21, 1984, the body of a teenage female was found in Seattle, Washington. She had died at least ten months before her discovery and was aged between 12 and 18. She was most likely left-handed, and a healed fracture was also observed on her skull. Gary Ridgway described her as a white female in her early twenties who may have had brown hair.On January 2, 1986, the body of another female was found in Auburn, King County, Washington. She was aged between 14 and 19 and had lain undiscovered for between two and six years.A third Green River victim also remains unidentified. Her remains were discovered in August 2003. Due to the recovered remains being partial, no option exists to reconstruct her face, although she is believed to have been aged between 13 and 24. Ridgway described this victim as a white female in her mid-teens or early twenties with blond or brown hair and around 135 pounds in weight.
These three victims remain known as Jane Doe B-10, Jane Doe B-17 and Jane Doe B-20, respectively. Most, though not all, of the Green River Killer's victims who have been identified were involved in prostitution.


== West Virginia ==


=== Morgan County Jane Doe ===
On May 10, 1950, the nude body of a white female was discovered in Morgan County, West Virginia. She had been strangled to death within 48 hours prior to her discovery, with her body being discarded in a wooded area close to the state border of Maryland. She was estimated to be between the ages of 35 and 50 at the time of her death.
The victim had reddish hair in a perm and her height was approximately five feet five inches. Her weight was between 125 and 135 pounds. The victim had several distinctive scars upon her body; one shaped like the letter "w" on her forehead; and another shaped like the letter "y" on one of her wrists. A scar from a hysterectomy and an appendectomy were also present. Her hands were noticeably small, and she had freckles on the back of both hands and upon her arms. Despite the fact the decedent was found shortly after her death, her eye color is unknown.
In 2007, the body was exhumed to obtain DNA information in efforts to determine her identity.


=== Wetzel County Jane Doe ===


== Wisconsin ==


=== "Little Lord Fauntleroy" ===

A young boy estimated to be between five and seven years old whose body was found in a pond in Waukesha, Wisconsin in 1921. He was dressed in upper-class clothing. Despite the apparently affluent background of the child, his family never claimed his body.


=== Columbia County Jane Doe ===

The skeletal remains of a woman were found in Caledonia, Columbia County, Wisconsin on May 8, 1982. The body was found in a wooded area near Highway 78. It is believed that she had died elsewhere and was disposed of at that location. The victim and her murderer may not have been local to the area where the body was discovered as her body was found near a highway, indicating that her body may have been transported to the location from elsewhere in the United States.The victim, aged 45 to 65 and most likely white, had been killed by blunt-force trauma to the skull. She had likely borne at least one child before her death. There was evidence of arthritis in her neck and back, and this may have affected the way she walked.Because of the degree of decomposition of the body, the hair color, eye color, weight, and complexion of the victim are unknown. However, some details could be assessed. Her height is estimated to be 5 feet 5 to 5 feet 7 inches tall. The victim's dental characteristics were fairly unusual, as the partial denture and crowns in her mouth were said to have been out of the ordinary. No clothing was found at the body disposal site except for a multicolored blouse and size 12 brown pants.She was buried in Wyocena, Wisconsin, on September 1, 1987, after her case went cold but her body was later exhumed in April 2014. The remains were transported to Virginia for additional testing, including DNA profiling. Since the case was reopened and reintroduced to the public eye, tips as to her identity have been submitted to the authorities.


=== Barron County John Doe ===
The skeleton of a young man was discovered by loggers on September 21, 1982, in Dallas, Barron County, Wisconsin. This decedent is estimated to be between 18 and 24 years old at the time of his death. Basic estimations, such as the height, weight and hair color were later calculated. He was about 5 feet 7 to 5 feet 9 inches tall and likely weighed 180 to 195 pounds, with a large build. Hair found with the body was light brown.
It is believed that the decedent had been stabbed to death; this was indicated by tears in his western-style plaid shirt. He was also wearing jeans, a denim jacket, and blue shoes with white stripes.
Some distinctive elements as to the victim were also noted. It is possible that he wore glasses, although none were found at the scene. He had received a large amount of dental work in life; this had been performed shortly before he died. He had also had some kind of surgery on his left knee that involved a screw and staple in the tibia. This kind of surgery would have required an extensive hospitalization period that could have lasted up to six months. Serial numbers on the screw and staple were traced, but this did not lead to the location where they had been purchased.In 2019 the DNA Doe Project started to investigate this case to try to identify the body.


=== Vernon County Jane Doe ===

Vernon County Jane Doe is a woman aged between 50 and 65 years old who was murdered in 1984. She had been killed by blunt-force trauma to her head. Her hands had been severed from her arms to prevent fingerprinting and identification.


=== "Chimney Crossdresser" ===
Skeletal remains of a lightly-built Caucasian male between the ages of 22 and 27, discovered in the now-defunct 'Good N Loud' music store on University Avenue in Madison on September 3, 1989, when the owner pulled a vent pipe from the brickwork in an attempt to find the source of a blockage that was causing water seepage. He was wearing a paisley dress, a black, long sleeved White Stag blouse, an Iron cross necklace, and a 'shag' sweater, and had brown hair and a slight overbite. He was carrying a butter knife, a spare pair of socks and a comb at the time of his death, and was not wearing underwear. His pelvis had been broken, possibly in the process of forcing him into the chimney, and he may have been there for two months to two years. He may have worked as a page in the state Legislature sometime between 1977 and 1985.


=== St. Croix County Jane Doe ===
The skull of a woman aged 35 to 60 years was found in an advanced stage of decomposition on October 21, 2002. She had been dead for approximately one year before her skull was found.The skull had been placed in a garbage bag, which was disposed of near Anderson Scout Camp Road, where it was later discovered by Boy Scouts.The woman had dark brown hair, no teeth, and may have been of mixed race. Examination of the skull indicated that she may have had a mental disability. She may also have had "different looking" features, such as wide-set eyes and a flat nose. She may have been living in a group home, as her condition may have been severe.


=== Fond du Lac County Jane Doe ===

A teenage or young adult woman who was found frozen in ice in 2008. She had a distinctive overbite and may have been pigeon-toed or knock-kneed.


== Wyoming ==


=== "Bitter Creek Betty" ===

The nude body of a white female was discovered on March 1, 1992, in Sweetwater County, Wyoming. The decedent's body is believed to have been discarded at the location of her discovery approximately one month prior, although due to the cold weather, her body was well preserved. She was between 24 and 32 years of age, and between five feet six and five feet eight inches in height. She had a scar from a Caesarean section on her abdomen as well as a tattoo of a rose beneath one of her breasts. At the crime scene, a golden-appearing necklace and ring, sweatpants and pink underwear were found. (After images of the victim's tattoo were published throughout the United States, a man came forward claiming that he had performed the tattoo on the woman. This man claimed that she was Hispanic, lacking any discernible accent, and was likely a drifter who hitchhiked frequently around the country.)
Later genetic testing would also determine the woman was of possible Hispanic and European descent. This unidentified decedent is also known as "Rose Doe".
The woman had died from being stabbed through one of the nostrils, having also been strangled and beaten, likely at another location. She had also been sexually assaulted both anally and vaginally prior to her murder.
Multiple missing persons have been ruled out as possible identities of Bitter Creek Betty. Apart from this victim, two other decedents from the area also remain unidentified. DNA from the scene has also matched another murder, indicating she has been murdered by a serial killer.


=== Sheridan County Jane Doe ===

A female aged 16 to 21 was discovered murdered on April 13, 1992, in Sheridan County, Wyoming. DNA from the scene was eventually matched to that found at the site of Bitter Creek Betty's body. Unlike the previous victim, the body of this decedent was too decomposed to identify visually and her eye color could not be determined. The cause of her death was ruled as blunt force trauma to the head. She was white, five feet five to five feet six inches tall, 110 to 115 pounds and had brown hair with a wavy texture. It is believed that she was murdered at a different area than where her body was discovered.The victim's clothing consisted of a patterned white and light blue top that had ties underneath the bust, with pearl and jewel-like buttons. The female also wore a bra, blue jeans, pink underwear and brass earrings.


== See also ==
List of murdered American children
List of unidentified decedents in the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
The Doe Network
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children
National Missing and Unidentified Persons System
Savage Watch — Unidentified Persons