University of Chicago Medical Center

The University of Chicago Medical Center (UChicago Medicine) is a nationally ranked academic medical center located in Hyde Park on the South Side of Chicago. It is the flagship campus for the University of Chicago Medicine system and was established in 1898. Affiliated with and located on the University of Chicago campus, it also serves as the teaching hospital for Pritzker School of Medicine. Primary medical facilities on campus include the Center for Care and Discovery, Bernard A. Mitchell Hospital, and Comer Children's Hospital.
In 2019, U.S. News and World Report ranked UChicago Medicine the second best hospital in both Chicago and Illinois.


== History ==
The University of Chicago Medicine and Biological Sciences, one of the nation's leading academic medical institutions, was founded in 1927 when it first opened to patients. Today, it comprises the University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine; the University of Chicago Biological Sciences Division, a section committed to scientific discovery; and the University of Chicago Medical Center. Twelve Nobel Prize winners in physiology or medicine have been affiliated with the University of Chicago Medicine.University of Chicago Medicine physicians are members of the University of Chicago Physicians Group, which includes about 900 physicians and covers the full array of medical and surgical specialties. The physicians are faculty members of the Pritzker School of Medicine.
These organizations are headed by Kenneth S. Polonsky, MD, Dean of the Biological Sciences Division and the Pritzker School of Medicine, and executive vice president for medical affairs at the University of Chicago.Between 2005 and 2009, former First Lady Michelle Obama served as Vice-President for Community and External AffaIrs. Obama resigned the position in 2009 as she and then President Barack Obama prepared their move to the White House.The Center for Care and Discovery (CCD) opened in 2013 and to date serves as the flagship hospital for UChicago Medicine. The 10-story facility has 436 beds in all private rooms, 52 intensive care beds, 9 suites for advanced imaging and interventional procedures and 23 operating rooms designed to accommodate hybrid and robotic procedures.
In December 2015, the university announced plans to expand the University of Chicago Medical Center. The expansion included an overhauled cancer treatment facility and a new adult Level I trauma center. The center now includes 188 additional beds and has increased the hospital to its biggest size since the 1970s. The expansion was in response to an increased demand for bed space, as the medical center had been operating near capacity.In December 2017, a new adult emergency room connected to the Center for Care and Discovery opened for patient care. Later in May 2018, the Level I trauma center completed its expansion and opened after years of campaigning and protests by area residents. The center is expected to serve between 2,700 to 4,000 patients a year and is the South Side's first Level I trauma center since the late 1980s. The remainder of the expansion is expected to be finished by 2022.
As of 2019, National Institute of Health research funding reached $168 million annually.


== Composition ==
 
University of Chicago Medicine consists of:

Center for Care and Discovery, the primary adult inpatient care facility (opened in 2013 at a cost of $700 million)
Bernard A. Mitchell Hospital, adult inpatient care facility which houses the Burn and Complex Wound Center
Comer Children's Hospital, including the University's Pediatric Level 1 Trauma Center
University of Chicago Medicine Family Birth Center, a maternity and women's hospital
Duchossois Center for Advanced Medicine, an outpatient care facility
Pritzker School of Medicine
The Knapp Center for Biomedical Discovery (KCBD)
The University of Chicago Comprehensive Cancer Center (in the main campus and other locations)
regional physician offices located throughout the Chicago area


== Recognition ==
The University of Chicago Medical Center is frequently ranked among the best in the country and a leader in both Chicago and Illinois by U.S. News & World Report. The 2010 rankings by U.S. News & World Report included the following 11 adult medical specialties: 
digestive disorders (6),
cancer (15),
endocrinology (18),
kidney disease (21),
respiratory disorders (21),
heart (27),
urology  (28),
geriatrics (29),
gynecology (34),
neurology and neurosurgery (36) and,
ear, nose, and throat (38). Until 2012, it was the only hospital in Illinois ever to be included on the magazine's "Honor Roll" of the best hospitals in the United States, and has made this coveted list 10 times. 


== References ==


== External links ==
University of Chicago Medicine
University of Chicago Medicine Comer Children's Hospital