Turnpike Lane tube station

Turnpike Lane is a London Underground station at Turnpike Lane in the London Borough of Haringey in north London, England. The station is on the northeastern part of Piccadilly line between Manor House and Wood Green. The station was opened on 19 September 1932 as part of the Cockfosters extension. It is in Travelcard Zone 3. 


== History ==
It was opened on 19 September 1932. It was the first Underground station in the Municipal Borough of Tottenham and was located at the meeting point of the boroughs of Tottenham, Hornsey and Wood Green, all now part of the London Borough of Haringey. 
Like all stations on the Cockfosters extension, Turnpike Lane set new aesthetic standards not previously seen on the Underground. During the planning period for the extension to Cockfosters, two alternate names for this station, North Harringay and Ducketts Green (Ducketts Common is located opposite) were considered but rejected.


== Design ==
The station was designed by the architect Charles Holden and is a well-preserved example of the modernist house style of London Transport in the 1930s. It was listed at Grade II in 1994. The ticket hall is an enormous brick box, with two large ventilation towers, half-sunk into the surrounding ground. Its high walls contain segmented windows that allow natural light to shine far into the station. The effect in late afternoon light is akin to that in a cathedral transept. Two of the street entrances gave access to the tram routes to and from Alexandra Palace via tramway island exits into Turnpike Lane. The tram services were withdrawn in 1938 and replaced by buses; these continued to use the tram islands until 1968, when they were removed.
The sub-surface areas are tiled in biscuit coloured tiles lined with yellow friezes. The booking hall is 12 feet (3.7 metres) below street level. In common with Manor House and Wood Green, the station tunnels have a diameter of 23 feet (7 metres) and were designed for the greater volume of traffic expected. Bounds Green and Southgate have only 21-foot (6.4 metres) diameter platform tunnels. The construction of "suicide pits" between the rails was also innovative. These were built in connection with a system of passageways under the platforms to give access to the track.
The station originally featured a large lamp standard and sign in the space in front of the station which was part of Holden's original design, but this has since been removed.The bus station at the back of the station complex was covered in 1968 as part of a "reshaping plan" of London bus services. The roof was later removed as part of the rebuilding in the late 1990s.


== Location ==
It is located on the junction of, and directly serves, Turnpike Lane and Green Lanes.
London Buses routes 29, 41, 67, 121, 123, 141, 144, 184, 217, 221, 230, 231, 232, 329, 444 and W4 and night routes N29 and N91 serve the station.


== Future ==
In May 2013, the government confirmed the station to be on its main consultation route for the Crossrail 2 proposal, to be on the blue-printed Cheshunt branch.


== Popular culture ==
The station is mentioned in the song "Junkie Doll" by Mark Knopfler on his album Sailing to Philadelphia, and also in "Los Angeles Waltz" by Razorlight on their self-titled album Razorlight.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Underground Journeys: Turnpike Lane". Royal Institute of British Architects. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. - Architectural history and photograph of Turnpike Lane in 1932