David Bader (computer scientist)

David A. Bader (born May 4, 1969) is a Distinguished Professor and Director of the Institute for Data Science at the New Jersey Institute of Technology.  Previously, he served as a Professor, Chair of the School of Computational Science and Engineering, and Executive Director of High-Performance Computing in the Georgia Tech College of Computing. In addition, Bader was selected as the director of the first Sony Toshiba IBM Center of Competence for the Cell Processor at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He is an IEEE Fellow, AAAS Fellow, SIAM Fellow.  Bader is a leading expert in data sciences. His main areas of research are in at the intersection of high-performance computing and real-world applications, including cybersecurity, massive-scale analytics, and computational genomics.Bader is an expert in the design and analysis of parallel and multicore algorithms for real-world applications such as those in cybersecurity and computational biology. He has won awards from IBM, Microsoft Research, Nvidia, Facebook, Intel, and Sony. He has co-chaired a series of meetings. He was recognized as one of the most impactful authors in the history of the IEEE International Conference on High-Performance Computing, Data, and Analytics (HiPC) in 2018.


== Early life ==
Bader is the son of Chemistry professor Morris Bader and his wife Karen. He is an Eagle Scout in the Boy Scouts of America, receiving this designation in 1985. Bader graduated from Liberty High School in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania in 1987. He received a B.S. in Computer Engineering in 1990 and an M.S. in Electrical Engineering in 1991 from Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. He then received a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering in 1996 from The University of Maryland, College Park. While at UMD in 1992, Bader was awarded a NASA Graduate Student Researchers Fellowship by Gerald Soffen, project scientist of the Viking missions to Mars, at Goddard Space Flight Center.


== Career ==
From 1998 to 2005, Bader was a professor and Regents' Lecturer at The University of New Mexico. In 2005, he moved to Georgia Tech, where he was a Professor and served as the first Chair of the School of Computational Science and Engineering (CSE) from July 2014 to June 2019. In July 2019, Bader joined the New Jersey Institute of Technology as a Distinguished Professor in the Department of Computer Science, the Ying Wu College of Computing. He has served on numerous conference program committees related to parallel processing, edited numerous journals, published numerous articles, and is a Fellow of the IEEE, Fellow of the AAAS, Fellow of SIAM, and Member of the ACM.In October 2018, Bader was named Editor-in-Chief of ACM Transactions on Parallel Computing. He served as the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems (TPDS), from 2013-2017 and serves as an Associate Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing (JPDC). Bader has been an associate editor of IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, IEEE DSOnline, Parallel Computing, and the ACM Journal of Experimental Algorithmics, and has published over 210 articles in peer reviewed journals and conferences.Bader was a lead investigator on the Nvidia Echelon project, a $25 million DARPA Award through the Ubiquitous High Performance Computing (UHPC) program. The four-year research collaboration with Nvidia covered work to develop new GPU technologies required to build the new class of exascale supercomputers. 
In November 2006, Bader was selected by Sony, Toshiba, and IBM to direct the first Center of Competence for the Cell Processor. Bader was elected as an IEEE Fellow in 2009. Since 2011, he has been working with the Georgia Tech Research Institute on the Proactive Discovery of Insider Threats Using Graph Analysis and Learning project.On July 29, 2015, President Barack Obama announced the National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI). Bader was invited by the White House on October 20–21, 2015, to serve as a panelist at the White House’s National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI) Workshop.  Following this, the White House’s Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) invited Bader to serve as a panelist at the NITRD High End Computing (HEC) Interagency Working Group (IWG) and Big Data Senior Steering Group (SSG) "Supercomputing and Big Data: From Collision to Convergence" Panel, at the 27th IEEE and ACM Supercomputing Conference (SC15), Austin, TX, November 18, 2015. On July 29, 2016, Bader was an invited attendee to the White House’s National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI) Anniversary Workshop.Bader co-founded Graph500 List, for benchmarking "Big Data" computing platforms.In April 2019, it was announced that Bader and his lab at Georgia Tech would partner with NVIDIA to develop data analytics solutions for their GPUs.In July 2019, the New Jersey Institute of Technology announced that Bader will serve as Director of its newly established Institute for Data Science at the Ying Wu College of Computing. The Institute for Data Science combines existing research centers in big data, medical informatics, and cybersecurity at NJIT, conducting both basic and applied research.


== Awards ==
In June 2010, Intel supported Bader's research on graph analytics with a 3-year award from the Intel Labs Academic Research Office for the Parallel Algorithms for Non-Numeric Computing Program.Bader is an NSF CAREER Award recipient. In 2011, he was named a Fellow Member of the AAAS and IEEE Fellow. He was also named a "Rock Star of High Performance Computing" by InsideHPC in 2011, and a member of "People to Watch" by HPC Wire in 2012 and 2014. He was awarded a SIAM fellowship in 2019.University of Maryland's Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering presented Bader as the first recipient of their Distinguished Alumni Award in 2012. In 2019, Bader was awarded the Facebook AI System Hardware/Software Co-Design Research Award to develop "high-performance AI solutions for existing as well as future AI hardware."At Georgia Tech, Bader received several honors and awards, including the Dean's Award in 2007 and Outstanding Senior Faculty Research Award in 2014.
Bader is a Golden Core Member of the IEEE Computer Society (2010), and a recipient of the IEEE Computer Society Meritorious Service Award (2010).


== Personal life ==
Bader has one daughter, Sadie Rose, who is an avid artist.


== References ==


== External links ==
David Bader's New Jersey Institute of Technology website