Streptopelia

Streptopelia is a genus of birds in the dove family. The name Streptopelia is from Ancient Greek streptos, "collar" and peleia, "dove". These are mainly slim, small to medium-sized species. The upperparts tend to be pale brown, and the underparts are often a shade of pink. Many have a characteristic black-and-white patch on the neck, and monotonous cooing songs.

The heartland of this genus is Africa, but several species occur in tropical southern Asia. As a group, this genus is highly successful; many species are abundant in a range of habitats in the tropics, and two now have a much more extensive distribution.
The Eurasian collared dove, Streptopelia decaocto, naturally expanded out of its original range of the warmer temperate regions from south east Europe to Japan to colonise the rest of Europe, reaching as far west as Great Britain by 1960, and Ireland soon after. It has also been introduced into the US and, as of 1999 it had been reported from 22 states and was still spreading rapidly.
A DNA sequence analysis has concluded that the genus consists of three distinct lineages. One contains the laughing dove and the spotted dove, which have long been recognized as having distinct morphology and behavior. The second group contains most of the other species, except the Malagasy turtle dove and the pink pigeon, which appear to be the surviving species of an endemic Madagascar/Mascarenes radiation and have at times been placed in other genera. The two-species lineages appear to be each other's closest relatives and cannot be firmly assigned to either Columba or Streptopelia (although overall they seem to be close to the latter). Thus, it might be best to split the two minor lineages off as distinct genera, namely Spilopelia for the first (which although not having priority over Stigmatopelia, which occurs earlier on the page, is chosen on the first reviser principle) and Nesoenas for the last.


== Species ==

Genus Streptopelia

Eurasian collared dove or collared dove, Streptopelia decaocto
Barbary dove Streptopelia risoria (domesticated; taxonomic status doubtful)
African collared dove, Streptopelia roseogrisea
European turtle dove Streptopelia turtur
Oriental turtle dove Streptopelia orientalis
Dusky turtle dove, Streptopelia lugens
Adamawa turtle dove, Streptopelia hypopyrrha
Island collared dove, Streptopelia bitorquata
Philippine collared dove, Streptopelia dusumieri
White-winged collared dove, Streptopelia reichenowi
Mourning collared dove, Streptopelia decipiens
Red-eyed dove, Streptopelia semitorquata
Ring-necked dove, Streptopelia capicola
Vinaceous dove, Streptopelia vinacea
Red turtle dove, Streptopelia tranquebaricaThe genera Spilopelia and Nesoenas have sometimes been placed in Streptopelia, but have since been separated out, as this makes the genus polyphyletic.
Genus Spilopelia

Laughing dove Spilopelia senegalensis (sometimes separated as Stigmatopelia)
Spotted dove Spilopelia chinensisGenus Nesoenas

Malagasy turtle dove, Nesoenas picturatus
†Rodrigues pigeon, Nesoenas rodericanus - extinct (before 1690?)
Pink pigeon, Nesoenas mayeri
†Réunion pink pigeon, Nesoenas duboisi - extinct (c. 1700)


== References ==

 Media related to Nesoenas at Wikimedia Commons
 Media related to Spilopelia at Wikimedia Commons