Aerolíneas Peruanas

Aerolíneas Peruanas S.A. (also known by the abbreviation APSA or the English translation Peruvian Airlines) was an airline from Peru, serving as flag carrier of the country from 1956 to 1971. Headquartered in Lima, it operated a network of scheduled passenger flights to major places in Latin America, as well as the United States, out of its hub at Lima Airport. In 1967, APSA had around 1,000 employees.


== History ==
Aerolíneas Peruanas was founded by C. W. Shelton in September 1956, with 77 percent of the company's shares spread amongst private Peruvian investors. Flight operations were launched in mid-1957, on the Lima to Santiago and Miami routes. Originally not a member of the International Air Transport Association (IATA was only joined in 1966), APSA could significantly undercut the usual airline fares for flights between South America and the USA. To strengthen its market position, APSA went into a partnership with Transportes Aéreos Nacionales (TAN, from Honduras) and Compañía Ecuatoriana de Aviación (CEA, from Ecuador).The Douglas DC-6 being the aircraft most commonly used with the airline in the early 1960s, Aerolíneas Peruanas joined the jet age on 1 December 1963 with the introduction of the Convair 990 Coronado. During that years, the network had been greatly expanded, which culminated in the launch of transatlantic flights using the Douglas DC-8 by the end of the decade.In the early 1970s, Aerolíneas Peruanas found itself in a worsening financial situation. Plans for a take-over by the Peruvian government and Spanish national airline Iberia failed, so that the company was forced to cease all flight operations on 2 May 1971.


== Route network ==
APSA offered scheduled passenger flights to the following destinations:


== Fleet ==
Over the years, APSA operated the following aircraft types:


== Incidents ==
On 11 January 1969, an Aerolíneas Peruanas Convair 990 Coronado was hijacked en route a flight from Panama City to Miami and forced to divert to Cuba. At that time, such United States-Cuba hijackings had become common occurrences.


== References ==