Asia Pacific Screen Awards

The Asia Pacific Screen Awards (APSA) is an international cultural initiative of the Brisbane City Council, Australia, to honour and promote the films, actors, directors, and cultures of the Asia-Pacific region to a global audience and to realise the objectives of UNESCO to promote and preserve the respective cultures through the influential medium of film. 


== Event history ==
Staged for the first time in 2007, APSA collaborates with UNESCO and FIAPF-International Federation of Film Producers Associations. Winners are determined by an international jury and films are judged on cinematic excellence and the way in which they attest to their cultural origins. APSA takes the works of filmmakers across more than 70 countries and areas in the Asia-Pacific region to new international audiences.
Nominees are automatically inducted into the Asia Pacific Screen Academy, a body of Asia-Pacific filmmakers. Australian screen legend, Jack Thompson AM, is the President of the Academy.
The 11th annual Asia Pacific Screen Awards was held in Brisbane, Australia on 23 November 2017. The International Jury that determined the winners was led by award-winning Australian film editor Jill Bilcock alongside Yoshi Yatabe, He Saifei, Adolfo Alix Jr and Adilkhan Yerzhanov.  Past International Jury members include: Asghar Farhadi, Anthony Chen, Hiam Abbass, Lu Yue, Maciej Stuhr, Rajit Kapur, Shyam Benegal, Malini Fonseka, Nansun Shi, Lord David Puttnam, Sergey Dvortsevoy, Salman Aristo, Gina Kim, Samuel Maoz, Kaori Momoi, Tahmineh Milani, Jan Chapman, Sasson Gabai, Tian Zhuangzhuang, Aparna Sen, Bruce Beresford, Huang Jianxin, Shabana Azmi and Jafar Panahi.


== Film categories and awards ==
Films can be submitted in one or all of four film categories:

Feature Film
Animated Feature Film
Youth Feature Film
Documentary Feature FilmAwards are presented for the following achievements:

Best Feature Film
Best Animated Feature Film
Best Documentary Feature Film
Best Youth Feature Film
Achievement in Directing
Best Screenplay
Achievement in Cinematography
Best Performance by an Actress
Best Performance by an Actor
Best Original ScoreIn addition, three special awards are presented for outstanding achievement:

The FIAPF Award: The International Federation of Film Producers Associations (FIAPF) determines the winner of the award for outstanding achievement in film in the Asia Pacific region.
Cultural Diversity Award under the patronage of UNESCO: The United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Award is for the outstanding contribution to the promotion and preservation of cultural diversity through film.
The Jury Grand Prize: The Jury of the Asia Pacific Screen Awards can, at its discretion, present a further award.The annual APSA Young Cinema Award, presented by NETPAC (Network for the Promotion of Asian Cinema) and the Griffith Film School (GFS), recognises the abundant emerging talent of the Asia Pacific.


== Major award winners ==


== Other awards ==

The Asia Pacific Screen Award for Best Original Score was awarded for the first time during the 12th Asia Pacific Screen Awards on 29 November 2018. The jury for the inaugural award was helmed by Ryuichi Sakamoto. According to APSA Chairman Michael Hawkins, this new category is designed to "honour more great films and the musicians who contribute so strongly to the emotions of the films".


=== Winners and nominees ===
2018


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website