American Political Science Association

The American Political Science Association (APSA) is a professional association of political science students and scholars in the United States. Founded in 1903, it publishes four academic journals (American Political Science Review, Perspectives on Politics, Journal of Political Science Education, PS: Political Science & Politics). APSA Organized Sections publish or are associated with 15 additional journals.
APSA presidents serve one-year terms. The current president is Paula D. McClain of Duke University. Woodrow Wilson, who later became President of the United States, was APSA president in 1909. APSA has its headquarters at 1527 New Hampshire Avenue NW in Washington, D.C., in a historic building that was owned by Admiral George Remy, labor leader Samuel Gompers, the American War Mothers, and Harry Garfield, son of President James A. Garfield and president of the association from 1921 to 1922.APSA administers the Centennial Center for Political Science and Public Affairs, which offers fellowships, conference, research space, and grants for scholars, and administers Pi Sigma Alpha, the honor society for political science students. APSA also periodically sponsors seminars and other events for political scientists, policymakers, the media, and the general public.


== Conferences and meetings ==
The association broadly aims to encourage scholarly understanding of political ideas, norms, behaviors, and institutions, and to inform public choices about government, governance, and public policy. APSA's mission is to "support excellence in scholarship and teaching and informed discourse about politics, policy and civic participation." APSA conducts several annual conferences, which provide an environment for scholars and other professionals to network and present their work, along with other pertinent and useful resources. The APSA Annual Meeting is among the world's largest gatherings of political scientists. It occurs on Labor Day weekend each summer. The 2019 Annual Meeting is scheduled for August 29 – September 1 in Washington, DC.
The  APSA Teaching and Learning Conference is a smaller working group conference hosting cutting-edge approaches, techniques, and methodologies for the political science classroom. The conference provides a forum for scholars to share effective and innovative teaching and learning models and to discuss broad themes and values of political science education—especially the scholarship of teaching and learning.
With funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, APSA has organized political science workshops in various locations in Africa, APSA Africa Workshops. The first workshop was convened in Dakar, Senegal in partnership with the West African Research Center from July 6–27, 2008. The annual residential workshops are led by a joint U.S. and African organizing team and aimed at mid-and junior-level scholars residing in Africa. They will enhance the capacities of political scientists and their resources in East and West Africa while also providing a forum for supporting their ongoing research. Each three week workshop brings together up to 30 scholars and cover substantive issues, methodologies, and reviews of research. See also, APSA International Programs.


== Awards ==
To recognize excellence in the profession, the Association offers the following awards:

Dissertation Awards
Paper and Article Awards
Book Awards
Career Awards
Goodnow Award
Teaching Award and Campus Teaching Award RecognitionIn addition to the APSA awards, the APSA organized sections also present over 100 awards at every Annual Meeting to recognize important research and contributions to the profession. These awards are presented at the Association's Annual Meeting.


== Centennial Center for Political Science and Public Affairs ==
Through its facilities and endowed funding programs, APSA'S Centennial Center for Political Science and Public Affairs supports political science teaching, research, and public engagement. Opened in 2003, the centenary of APSA's establishment, the Centennial Center encourages individual research and writing in all fields of political science, facilitates collaboration among scholars working within the discipline and across the social and behavioral sciences and humanities, and promotes communication between scholars and the public.
The Centennial Center, its facilities, and research support programs continue to be made possible in part through the generous donations of APSA members. The Centennial Center for Political Science and Public Affairs assists APSA members with the costs of research, including travel, interviews, access to archives, or costs for a research assistant. Funds can also be used to assist scholars in publishing their research. Grants can range in size from $500 to $10,000, depending upon the research fund. See more centennial funding programs and grants.


== Congressional Fellowship Program ==
The APSA Congressional Fellowship Program is a highly selective, nonpartisan program devoted to expanding knowledge and awareness of Congress. Since 1953, it has brought select political scientists, journalists, federal employees, health specialists, and other professionals to Capitol Hill to experience Congress at work through fellowship placements on congressional staffs.
The nine-month program begins each November with an intensive one-month introduction to Congress taught by leading experts in the field. After orientation, fellows work in placements of their choosing and also participate in ongoing seminars and enrichment programs.
Through this unique opportunity, the American Political Science Association enhances public understanding of policymaking and improves the quality of scholarship, teaching and reporting on American national politics.


== Publications ==
One key component of APSA's mission is to support political science education and the professional development of its practitioners. The APSA publications program attempts to fill the diverse needs of political scientists in academic settings as well as practitioners working outside of academia, and students at various stages of their education.
Journals

American Political Science Review (APSR)
Journal of Political Science Education
Perspectives on Politics
PS: Political Science & Politics
Organized Section JournalsSee APSA Journals.
Other Publications

Task Force Reports
Books and Career Materials
Political Science Now
Publication Resources & Manuals


== Presidents of the American Political Science Association ==

View APSA Presidential Addresses, 1903-present


== APSA Organized Sections ==
APSA members may also join the 41 membership organized sections focused around research themes in political science. See all APSA Organized Sections.

1. Federalism and Intergovernmental Relations
2. Law and Courts
3. Legislative Studies
4. Public Policy
5. Political Organizations and Parties
6. Public Administration
7. Conflict Processes
8. Representation and Electoral Systems
9. Presidents and Executive Politics (PEP, formerly called the Presidency Research Group)
10. Political Methodology
11. Religion and Politics
13. Urban Politics
15. Science, Technology and Environmental Politics
16. Women and Politics Research
17. Foundations of Political Theory
18. Information Technology and Politics
19. International Security and Arms Control
20. Comparative Politics
21. European Politics and Society
22. State Politics and Policy
23. Political Communication
24. Politics and History
25. Political Economy
27. New Political Science
28. Political Psychology
29. Political Science Education
30. Politics, Literature, and Film
31. Foreign Policy
32. Elections, Public Opinion, and Voting Behavior
33. Race, Ethnicity and Politics
34. International History and Politics
35. Comparative Democratization
36. Human Rights
37. Qualitative and Multi-method Research
38. Sexuality and Politics
39. Health Politics and Policy
40.  Canadian Politics
41. Political Networks
42. Experimental Research
43. Migration and Citizenship
44. African Politics
45. Class and Inequality
46. Ideas, Knowledge and Politics
47. American Political Thought
48. International Collaboration
49. Middle East and North Africa Politics


== Presidential rankings ==
Since 2015, they have conducted 2 rankings of American Presidents.


=== 2015 ===
In 2015, Republican President Abraham Lincoln was rated the greatest President, while Democratic President James Buchanan was considered the worst. Barack Obama, president at the time of the survey, being ranked 18th.


=== 2018 ===
In 2018, Republican Abraham Lincoln was ranked the greatest American President, while current President Donald Trump was ranked last. Previous president Barack Obama was ranked 8th.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website