Craig Young (cricketer)

Craig Alexander Young (born 4 April 1990) is an Irish cricketer. Young is a right-handed batsman who bowls right-arm medium pace. On 26 May 2013, Young made his first-class debut for Ireland against Scotland. He made his One Day International debut against Scotland in September 2014, taking 5 wickets for 45 runs. He made his Twenty20 International debut against Scotland on 18 June 2015.In December 2018, he was one of nineteen players to be awarded a central contract by Cricket Ireland for the 2019 season.


== Early and domestic career ==
Young was born in Derry on 4 April 1990. He played for Bready Cricket Club in the North West Senior League as a medium pace bowler. After playing for the Ireland national under-19 cricket team at the 2010 ICC Under-19 Cricket World Cup where he took nine wickets, Young was given a one-year contract by Sussex for 2010. A series of injuries prevented him from making a significant impression, and much of his cricket for Sussex came for the county's second team. He made his first-class debut in an ICC Intercontinental Cup for Ireland against Scotland in late 2013, taking four wickets in the first innings and two in the second during an innings victory for Ireland. Early the following year, a few months after being released by Sussex, Young was contracted as an "A" category player for Ireland, the highest level of contract, and he made his one-day debut for the side shortly thereafter, albeit not in a full international match.In July 2019, he was selected to play for the Belfast Titans in the inaugural edition of the Euro T20 Slam cricket tournament. However, the following month the tournament was cancelled.


== International career ==
Young made his One Day International debut for Ireland in September 2014, and became the ninth player to take five wickets on ODI debut. That remains his best performance for Ireland in ODIs. In Ireland's 2015 ICC Intercontinental Cup victory over the United Arab Emirates, Young recorded his best match figures in a first-class match, collecting four wickets in the first innings and three in the second, during a large victory for his side.In May 2018, Young was added to Ireland's Test squad for their match against Pakistan, but he was not selected to play. In June 2019, he was named in the Ireland Wolves squad for their home series against the Scotland A cricket team. In July 2019, he was named in Ireland's Test squad for their one-off match against England at Lord's, but he did not play.In September 2019, he was named in Ireland's squad for the 2019 ICC T20 World Cup Qualifier tournament in the United Arab Emirates.


== References ==


== External links ==
Craig Young at ESPNcricinfo
Craig Young at CricketArchive (subscription required)