Frankfurter Rundschau

The Frankfurter Rundschau (FR) is a German daily newspaper, based in Frankfurt am Main. It is published every day but Sunday as a city, two regional and one nationwide issues and offers an online edition (see link below) as well as an e-paper. Local major competitors are the conservative-liberal Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ), the local edition of the conservative tabloid Bild-Zeitung, the best-selling newspaper in Europe, and the smaller local conservative Frankfurter Neue Presse. The Rundschau's layout is modern and its editorial stance is social liberal. It holds that "independence, social justice and fairness" underlie its journalism.
Frankfurter Rundschau Druck and Verlagshaus GmbH filed for bankruptcy on 12 November 2012. Then the paper was acquired by Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung and Frankfurter Societät (publisher of the Frankfurter Neue Presse) in 2013,  by taking over just 28 full-time journalists. The FR editorial board continues to be bound by the legacy of Karl Gerold and the commitment to a "left-liberal" political line, and continues to be integrated in the national and international editorial and correspondents network of the DuMont Mediengruppe, the former majority owners. The private foundation managing Karl Gerold's legacy still owns 10% of the shares. But all commercial activity of the paper, printing, selling advertisement and distribution is in the hands of the Frankfurer Societät. The FR printing enterprise was closed. The contracts for printing BILD-Zeitung and other papers went from the FR's printshop to the FAZ's Societätsdruckerei.


== History and profile ==

The Rundschau published its first issue on 1 August 1945 shortly after the end of World War II in Europe. It was the first newspaper published in the US sector in occupied Germany and the third newspaper in post-war Germany. The licence was handed over to the first team of editors consisting of Emil Carlebach, Hans Etzkorn, Wilhelm Karl Gerst, Otto Grossmann, Wilhelm Knothe, Paul Rodemann and Arno Rudert, a progressive think-tank of social democrats, political Catholics and communists, who had spent years in the resistance and Nazi concentration camps or in exile. With the coming of the Cold War, the American occupation authority forced all communist members of the editorial team to leave the paper two years later.
The paper was awarded the European Newspaper of the Year in the category of judges' special recognition by the European Newspaper Congress in 2011.In the 2013 elections the magazine was among the supporters of the Social Democratic Party (SPD).The 1993 circulation of the paper was 189,000 copies. In the first quarter of 2015, the newspaper boasted a circulation of around 70,000 copies.In 2019, the newspaper published an editorial titled "The Eternal Netanyahu" about Prime Minister of Israel Benjamin Netanyahu. The name evoked a Nazi Germany film titled The Eternal Jew. Ulf Poschardt, editor-in-chief of German newspaper Die Welt, tweeted a condemnation of the Frankfurter Rundschau, as did a top journalist for German newspaper Bild. The Frankfurter Rundschau claimed that the association was accidental.


== Changes ==
On 30 May 2007 the Rundschau changed its format to the award-winning smaller tabloid size.


== Restructuring ==
In 2003, the paper had financial difficulties and was supported by a guarantee from the federal state of Hesse. In May 2004 the Deutsche Druck- und Verlagsgesellschaft (DDVG), owned by the SPD, acquired 90 percent of the shares of the Druck- und Verlagshaus Frankfurt am Main (DuV), the publisher of the FR until then. The social democrats emphasized that they wanted to assure the future of one of the few left-liberal daily newspapers in Germany and asserted they would not exert influence on the articles. The social democrats also announced that they wanted to reduce their share to under 50 percent until 2006. In order to save the paper from insolvency, the DDVG soon drastically cut back expenditures. By means of dismissals and outsourcing, the number of employees shrank within the last three years from 1700 to 750.
Amid speculation on DDVG's complaints about too friendly articles on the new left party Die Linke and its plan to sell the majority of its shares (see article in the newspaper Junge Welt from 30 August 2007) Wolfgang Storz's term as editor-in-chief ended abruptly on 16 May 2006. The appointed next editor-in-chief was Uwe Vorkötter (effective 1 July 2006). Only a few days later, on 18 July 2007, the DDVG announced that it would sell 50 percent plus one share to the independent publishing company M. DuMont Schauberg based in Cologne, Germany. Today, DuMont Schauberg holds 50 percent plus one share, the DDVG owns 40 percent and the Karl-Gerold-Foundation holds 10 percent of the newspaper.


== Literature ==
Emil Carlebach: "Zensur ohne Schere, Die Gründerjahre der 'Frankfurter Rundschau' 1945/47" (English: "Censorship without scissors, The founding years of the 'Frankfurter Rundschau' 1945/47". Frankfurt 1985, ISBN 3-87682-807-4
Wolf Gunter Brügmann : "1968 - 2008. Vom Aufstieg und Niedergang der Frankfurter Rundschau" ("1968 - 2008: The rise and fall of the Frankfurter Rundschau")


== Notes ==


== Sources ==
European Newspaper Award 2007German linksReport in the German magazine Spiegel from 18 July 2006
Report in the newspaper Junge Welt from 13 May 2008


== External links ==
Frankfrter Rundschau online (German)