Hello Brother (1994 film)

Hello Brother is a 1994 Telugu action-comedy film, produced by K. L. Narayana under the Sri Durga Arts banner, presented by S. Gopal Reddy and directed by E V V Satyanarayana.  It stars Akkineni Nagarjuna, Ramya Krishna, Soundarya in the lead roles and music composed by Raj-Koti. The film was a blockbuster at the box office. It was later remade in Kannada as Cheluva, with V. Ravichandran and Hindi as Judwaa, with Salman Khan. The film is loosely based on the Jackie Chan film Twin Dragons.


== Plot ==
Misro (Charan Raj, 32) is a dacoit. SP Chakravarthy (Sarath Babu, 45) arrests him. Misro wounds himself and is taken to hospital for the cure, where Chakravarthy is waiting for his wife Geeta (Sangeetha, 43), who is in labor and she gives birth to twins and the doctor says that both children have reflection mentality, that means "if it pains to one other also hurts" depending on distance. Misro escapes and takes one of the twins with him, hurting Geeta. Chakravarthy goes after him, he could not find the child, but shoots Misro. The child was taken by a lady who works as a daily labourer with her husband and they adopted him. They have a daughter and one day in an accident at construction place both were killed. The two children become orphans and they grew up, but the brother Deva (Akkineni Nagarjuna, 21) with his friend Kasi (Brahmanandam, 34), another orphan become thieves for earning. On the other hand, Geetha goes into coma and Chakravarthy takes her to America for the cure, here the other twin Ravi Varma (also Nagarjuna, 21) is brought up. He returns to India as a rock star to give performances here. He is received by Giribabu (Chakravarthy's friend), who wishes to marry his daughter Manga (Ramya Krishna, 19) to him. But Manga is in love with Deva. In the airport, Ravi Varma sees Ooha (Soundarya, 19), daughter of Akkamamba (Annapoorna, 42), who is organizing his public performances and falls in love with her. Simhachalam Srihari, 29, who is Akkamamba's brother also wishes to marry Ooha. Meanwhile, at home Manga advances with him thinking he is Deva only. One day in a restaurant they see each other and find that they are identical, which leads to hilarious misunderstandings.
Meanwhile, Deva's sister Kasthuri (Aruna Sri, 20) sees local goon Mitra (Napoleon, 32) son of Misro killing an Inspector on the road and provides evidence in court. Enraged, Mitra teases her and Deva fights with him. So Mitra wants to take revenge against Deva, he sends his henchmen (Sivaji Raja) as the bride to Kasthuri, but Deva breaks up the plan and makes his sister's marriage with another guy. The court decides on the death sentence for Mitra.  Days pass, Kasthuri becomes pregnant and she is admitted into the hospital for delivery. Deva asks Ravi to stay at the hospital as he is going in search of money, Ravi visits  his father Chakravarthy. At the same time, Mitra escapes from jail come to the hospital to kidnap Kasthuri and recognizes Chakravarthy, that he who killed is father Misro and also knows that Deva is his son. He blackmails Deva to get Chakravarthy to release Kasthuri. Deva, who doesn't know that Chakravarthy is his father, goes to his house where Geetha also comes out from the coma by Deva's touch and he comes to know the truth that they are his parents. Finally, Deva and Ravi join together, protect their father and sister from Mitra and the story ends with the duo marrying their respective ladies.


== Cast ==


== Soundtrack ==
Music composed by Raj-Koti. All songs are blockbusters. Music released on SUPREME Music company. Song Priya Ragaaley's theme music based on the song white whisper released in 1992 by the French musical group Deep forest.


== Reception ==
The movie was largely appreciated and was highly successful at box-office. It proved that Nagarjuna could do comedy roles.


== Remakes ==


== Awards ==
Nandi Award for Best Music Director


== External links ==
Hello Brother on IMDb