Boulevard Saint-Joseph

Boulevard Saint-Joseph is a commercial boulevard in the former city of Hull, Quebec (now Gatineau). It runs from Boulevard Alexandre-Tache to the boundaries of the city of Gatineau and the suburban town of Chelsea.


== Southern section ==
Also known as Route 105 that travels all the way to Route 117 in Grand-Remous, north of Maniwaki, this road travels through a commercial district. Numerous types of businesses are located all along the road. Most of them are small independent companies by local entrepreneurs for the Association professionnelle des gens d'affaires de Hull. However, in the recent years the affluence dropped due to the development of the Plateau de la Capitale commercial district in which big-box stores were built in conjunction of the booming residential development in the area which drove away many customers from the Saint-Joseph commercial strip.
At its southern end is the Salaberry Armoury in which has a militia from the Hull regiment and a park called "Parc des Chars de Combat". The Université du Québec en Outaouais's two campuses are also located just off the road. 
Two roundabouts were built in 2004 and 2005, one at Montcalm Street and the other at Boulevard des Allumettières (formerly Boulevard Saint-Laurent) in which it serves as a direct link to the Aylmer sector and Le Plateau when the freeway (Route 148) was completed during the fall of 2007.


== Central section ==
There are also two shopping centres near Boulevard Saint-Raymond. At first there is Les Galeries de Hull, built in 1972 and owned by Ivanhoe Cambridge, which includes 75 stores. The Village Place Cartier is another mall. In the vicinity of these malls lies a Maxi superstore and a strip mall called Place Fleur de Lys. The hotel "auberge de la gare" is also located in the vicinity. A 21-story building called Place Vincent Massey is located in the same area as well.
There are also some residential sections including three apartment towers called Le Blackburn, Place Versailles and Le 700 St-Joseph which all contains 16 floors.
The intersection of Boulevard Saint-Joseph and Boulevard Saint-Raymond is one of the most congested intersections in Gatineau during afternoon peak hours and also during weekends, since it is loaded with heavy traffic going to Aylmer via Boulevard Saint-Raymond and to Ottawa and Gatineau via Autoroute 5 and drivers heading to Highway 5 often block the intersection, which results lengthy delays on Saint-Joseph heading north. The traffic jam is also caused by the configuration of the junction of southbound Highway 5 with eastbound Autoroute 50 where there is only one lane of traffic to access the 50 and traffic must change lanes immediately.


== Northern section ==
North of the junction of Autoroute 5, Boulevard Saint-Joseph is also known as Boulevard de l'Automobile due to numerous car dealerships located through this stretch all the way towards Chelsea. Retailers from Honda, Toyota, Suzuki, Subaru, Nissan, Hyundai and Nissan are also located on this road as well as an auction dealership called Mega Auto. Every spring, a portion of this road is closed to traffic on a particular Sunday for a sale involving the majority of the retailers. In that same area lies the southern terminus of Hull-Chelsea-Wakefield steam train line.


== Transportation ==
Many of the city's Société de transport de l'Outaouais's routes travels on that stretch of road particularly near the shopping district near Saint-Raymond and Montclair as well as near a park and ride facility at corner with Chemin Freeman.
The speed limit throughout all this stretch is 50 km/h. When it exits Gatineau it climbs to 70 km/h.


== Neighbourhoods ==
St-Jean Bosco
Wrightville
Parc de la Montagne/St-Raymond
Mont-Bleu
Hautes Plaines


== See also ==

List of Gatineau roads
Saint Joseph Boulevard (disambiguation)