St. Joseph Boulevard

Montreal Road (Ottawa Road #34) is a major east-west Ottawa road that links Lowertown to Vanier, and eastern neighbourhoods of Ottawa. Until downloading in 1998, it was part of the provincially managed Highway 17B.
At its western end, Montreal Road begins at the Cummings Bridge, which spans the Rideau River and is an extension of Rideau Street. It becomes Vanier's main road as it passes through the commercial heart of the community.
East of St. Laurent Boulevard, it becomes a four-lane principal road which divides several neighbourhoods such as Beacon Hill.
At Regional Road 174, Montreal Road continues as St. Joseph Boulevard which runs through the older portions of Orléans Village until Trim Road.  It continues east of Trim Road under the name Old Montreal Road. This road, which was known as Queen Street prior to amalgamation in 2001, goes through the old Cumberland Village and ends at Regional Road 174 just past Becketts Creek.
Points of interest along this road are (from west to east):

Montfort Hospital (Ontario's largest Francophone hospital)
National Research Council labs
Greens Creek Conservation Area
Place d'Orléans Shopping Centre
Orléans Town Centre.There are bus lanes between North River Road and St. Laurent Boulevard to speed transit service during rush hours. Future plans by the city could include an LRT corridor on this stretch all the way to Blair Road. 


== Neighbourhoods ==
Montreal Road goes through the following neighbourhoods:

Vanier
Cardinal Glen
Rothwell Heights
Beacon HillSt. Joseph Boulevard goes through the following neighbourhoods (all part of Orléans):

Convent Glen
Queenswood
Fallingbrook


== Major intersections ==
On Montreal Road:

Vanier Parkway (Ottawa Road 19)
St. Laurent Boulevard (Ottawa Road 26)
Aviation Parkway
Blair Road (Ottawa Road 27)
Ogilvie Road (Ottawa Road 50)
Regional Road 174On St. Joseph Boulevard:

Jeanne d'Arc Boulevard (Ottawa Road 55)
Orléans Boulevard (Ottawa Road 56)
Tenth Line Road (Ottawa Road 36)
Trim Road (Ottawa Road 57)