MacDonald Elementary School (page does not exist)

A school counselor works in primary (elementary and middle) schools and/or secondary schools to provide academic, career, college access/affordability/admission, and social-emotional competencies to all students through a school counseling program. 


== Academic, career, college, and social-emotional interventions and services ==
The four main school counseling program interventions include school counseling curriculum classroom lessons and annual academic, career/college access/affordability/admission, and social-emotional planning for every student; and group and individual counseling for some students. School counseling is an integral part of the education system in countries representing over half of the world's population and in other countries it is emerging as a critical support for elementary, middle, and high school learning, post-secondary options, and social-emotional/mental health.An outdated term for the profession was guidance counselor; school counselor is used as the school counselor's role is advocating for every student's academic, career, college access/affordability/attainment, and social-emotional competencies and success in all schools. In the Americas, Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Pacific, some countries with no formal school counseling programs use teachers or psychologists to do school counseling emphasizing career development.Countries vary in how a school counseling program and services are provided based on economics (funding for schools and school counseling programs), social capital (independent versus public schools), and school counselor certification and credentialing movements in education departments, professional associations, and local, state/province, and national legislation. School counseling is established in 62 countries and emerging in another seven.An international scoping project on school-based counseling showed school counseling is mandatory in 39 countries, 32 USA states, one Australian state, 3 German states, 2 countries in the United Kingdom, and three provinces in Canada. The largest accreditation body for Counselor Education/School Counseling programs is the Council for the Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP). International Counselor Education programs are accredited through a CACREP affiliate, the International Registry of Counselor Education Programs (IRCEP).
In some countries, school counseling is provided by school counseling specialists (for example, Botswana, China, Finland, Israel, Malta, Nigeria, Romania, Taiwan, Turkey, United States). In other cases, school counseling is provided by classroom teachers who either have such duties added to their typical teaching load or teach only a limited load that also includes school counseling activities (India, Japan, Mexico, South Korea, Zambia). The IAEVG focuses on career development with some international school counseling articles and conference presentations. Both the IAEVG and the Vanguard of Counsellors promote school counseling internationally.


== History, school counselor-to-student ratios, and mandates ==


=== Armenia ===
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the post-Soviet Psychologists of Armenia and the government developed the School Counselor position in Armenian Schools.


=== Australia ===
While national policy supports school counseling, only one Australian state requires it. The school counselor-to-student ratio ranges from 1:850 in the Australian Capital Territory to 1:18,000 in Tasmania. School counselors play an integral part in the Australian schooling system; they provide support to teachers, parents, and students. Their roles include counseling students and assisting parents/guardians to make informed decisions about their child's education for learning and behavioral issues.  School counselors assist schools and parents/guardians in assessing disabilities and they collaborate with outside agencies to provide the best support for schools, teachers, students, and parents.


=== Austria ===
Austria mandates school counseling at the high school level.


=== Bahamas ===
The Bahamas mandate school counseling.


=== Belgium ===
Although not mandated, some school counseling occurs in schools and community centers in three regions of the country.


=== Botswana ===
Botswana mandates school counseling.


=== Brazil ===
School Counselors in Brazil have large caseloads.


=== Canada ===
The roots of school guidance counselling stemmed from a response to the conditions created by the industrial revolution in the early 1900s. Originally, school counselling was often referred to as vocational guidance, where the goal of the profession was to help individuals find their path in a time where individuals previous ways of making a living had been displaced. As people moved towards industrialized cities, this guidance was required to help students navigate these new vocations. With a great discrepancy between the rich and the poor, vocational counselling was initiated to help support disadvantaged students After World War II, vocational guidance began to shift towards a new movement of counselling, which provided a theoretical backing. As the role of school counsellors progressed into the 1970s, there has become more uncertainty as to what the role entails. This role confusion continues into the 21st century, where there is a lack of clear consensus between counsellors, other teachers, administration, students and parents on what school counsellors should be prioritizing.Throughout Canada, the emerging trend among school counselling programs is to provide a comprehensive and cohesive approach. These programs address the personal, social, educational and career development of students. A comprehensive program consists of 4 components, including developmental guidance, individual student planning, responsive services and school and community support.

Developmental Guidance involves small group and class presentations about valuable life skills, which is generally supported through classroom curriculum.
Individual student planning involves assessing students abilities, providing advice on goals and planning transitions to work and school.
Responsive services includes counselling with students, consulting with parents and teachers, and referrals to outside agencies.
Support from the school and community includes such things as professional development, community outreach and program management.The process to become a school counsellor varies drastically across each province, with some requiring a graduate level degree in counselling while others require a teaching certification or both. Some provinces also require registration with the relevant provincial College of Registered Psychotherapists. These differences highlight the vast range of expertise required within the role of a school counsellor. Regardless of the professional requirements, all school counsellors are expected to guide students within the realm of mental health support, course choices, special education and career planning. The Canadian Counselling and Psychotherapy Association, Canada's leading association for counselling and psychotherapy, is working towards alignment among the provinces through partnership and collaboration between provinces. Recent conferences share information on the differences and similarities within each province and how progress is being made to ensure proper regulations are in place at a national level.In the province of Ontario, Canada, school guidance counsellors are found in both elementary and secondary settings, to varying degrees. The Greater Toronto Area, the largest metropolis in the country, have school counsellors in 31% of elementary schools, however the remainder of the province averages 6%. Additionally, in the elementary schools that have a school guidance counsellor, they are scheduled for an average of 1.5 days per week. These counsellors are generally classroom teachers for the remainder of the time. In secondary schools in Ontario, Canada, the average ratio of students to school guidance counsellors is 396:1. In 10% of Ontario schools, this average increases to 826:1. There is concern among administration that these staffing levels are not sufficient to meet the needs of students. This has been proven in recent articles appearing in the news featuring student stories of frustration as they prepare for graduation without the support they expected from school counsellors. Considering the extensive expectations placed on school counsellors, future research needs to address whether or not they can be met within one profession while effectively equipping students with support and information.
School counselors reported in 2004 at a conference in Winnipeg on issues such as budget cuts, lack of clarity about school counselor roles, high student-to-school counselor ratios, especially in elementary schools, and how using a comprehensive school counseling model helped clarify school counselor roles with teachers and administrators and strengthened the profession. More than 15 years later, the profession is continuing to evolve and meet the changing needs of 21st century students in Canada.


=== China ===
China has put substantial financial resources into school counseling with strong growth in urban areas but less than 1% of rural students receive it; China does not mandate school counseling.In China, Thomason & Qiong discussed the main influences on school counseling as Chinese philosophers Confucius and Lao-Tzu, who provided early models of child and adult development who influenced the work of Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers.Only 15% of high school students are admitted to college in China, so entrance exams are fiercely competitive. Students entering university graduate at a rate of 99%. Much pressure is put on children and adolescents to study and attend college. This pressure is a central focus of school counseling in China. An additional stressor is that there are not enough places for students to attend college, and over one-third of college graduates cannot find jobs, so career and employment counseling and development are also central in school counseling.
In China, there is a stigma related to social-emotional and mental health issues; therefore, even though most universities and many (urban) primary and secondary schools have school counselors,  many students are reluctant to seek counseling for issues such as anxiety and depression. There is no national system of certifying school counselors. Most are trained in Western-developed cognitive methods including REBT, Rogerian, Family Systems, Behavior Modification, and Object Relations. School Counselors also recommend Chinese methods such as qi-gong (deep breathing) and acupuncture, as well as music therapy. Chinese school counselors work within a traditional Chinese world view of a community and family-based system that lessens the focus on the individual. In Hong Kong, Hui (2000) discussed work moving toward comprehensive school counseling programs and eliminating the older remediation-style model.Middle school students are a priority for school counseling services in China.


=== Costa Rica ===
Costa Rica mandates school counseling.


=== Croatia ===
School counseling is only available in certain schools.


=== Cyprus ===
In 1991 Cyprus mandated school counseling with a goal of a 1:60 school counselor-to-student ratio and one full-time school counselor for every high school but neither of these goals has been accomplished.


=== Czech Republic ===
The Czech Republic mandates school counseling.


=== Denmark ===
Denmark mandates school counseling.


=== Egypt ===
School counseling services are delivered by elementary school psychologists with a ratio of 1 school psychologist to every 3,080 students.


=== Estonia ===
School counseling is only available in certain schools.


=== Finland ===
In Finland, legislation has been passed for a school counseling system. The Basic Education Act of 1998 stated that every student must receive school counseling services. All Finnish school counselors must have a teaching certificate, a master's degree in a specific academic subject, and a specialized certificate in school counseling. Finland has a school counselor-to-student ratio of 1:245.


=== France ===
France mandates school counseling in high schools.


=== Gambia ===
Gambia mandates school counseling.


=== Georgia ===
The school counselor-to-student ratio in Georgia is 1:615.


=== Germany ===
Two German states require school counseling at all education levels; high school counseling is established in all states.


=== Ghana ===
Ghana mandates school counseling 


=== Greece ===
There are provisions for academic and career counseling in middle and high schools but school counseling is not mandated. Social-emotional and mental-health counseling is done in community agencies. The National Guidance Resources Center in Greece was established by researchers at Athens University of Economics & Business (ASOEE) in 1993 under the leadership of Professor Emmanuel J. Yannakoudakis. The team received funding under the European Union (PETRA II Programme): The establishment of a national occupational guidance resources center in 1993-94. The team organized seminars and lectures to train the first career counselors in Greece in 1993. Further research projects at Athens University of Economics & Business were implemented as part of the European Union (LEONARDO Programme): a) A pilot project on the use of multimedia for career analysis, 1995-1999, b) guidance toward the future, 1995-1999, c) On the move to a guidance system, 1996-2001 and, d) Eurostage for guidance systems, 1996-1999.


=== Netherlands ===
School counseling is present in high schools.


=== Hong Kong ===
Hong Kong mandates school counseling.


=== Iceland ===
Iceland mandates school counseling.


=== India ===
In India, the Central Board of Secondary Education guidelines expect one school counselor appointed for every affiliated school, but this is less than 3% of all Indian students attending public schools. Confluence Educational Services Private Limited is into School Counselling services.


=== Indonesia ===
Indonesia mandates school counseling in middle and high school.


=== Iran ===
Middle school students are the priority for school counseling in Iran. It is mandated in high schools but there are not enough school counselors particularly in rural areas.


=== Ireland ===
In Ireland, school counseling began in County Dublin in the 1960s and went countrywide in the 1970s. However, legislation in the early 1980s severely curtailed the movement due to budget constraints. The main organization for the school counseling profession is the Institute of Guidance Counsellors (IGC), which has a code of ethics.


=== Israel ===
In Israel, a 2005 study by Erhard & Harel of 600 elementary, middle, and high school counselors found that a third of school counselors were delivering primarily traditional individual counseling services, about a third were delivering preventive classroom counseling curriculum lessons, and a third were delivering both individual counseling services and school counseling curriculum lessons in a comprehensive developmental school counseling program. School counselor roles varied due to three elements: the school counselor's personal preferences, school level, and the principal's expectations. Erhard & Harel stated that the profession in Israel, like many other countries, is transforming from marginal and ancillary services to a comprehensive school counseling approach integral in the total school's education program. In 2011-12, Israel had a school counselor-to-student ratio of 1:570.


=== Italy ===
School counseling is not well developed in Italy.


=== Japan ===
In Japan, school counseling is a recent phenomenon with school counselors being introduced in the mid-1990s and often part-time focused on behavioral issues. Middle school students are the priority for school counseling in Japan and it is mandated.


=== Jordan ===
Jordan mandates school counseling with 1,950 school counselors working in 2011-12.


=== Latvia ===
School counseling was introduced in Latvia in 1929 but disappeared in World War II.


=== Lebanon ===
In Lebanon, the government sponsored the first training of school counselors for public elementary and middle schools in 1996. There are now school counselors in 1/5 of the elementary and middle schools in Lebanon but none in high schools. School counselors have been trained in delivering preventive, developmental, and remedial services. Private schools have some school counselors serving all grade levels but the focus is individual counseling and remedial. Challenges include regular violence and wartime strife, not enough resources, and a lack of a professional school counseling organization, assigned school counselors covering two or more schools, and only two school counseling graduate programs in the country. Last, for persons trained in Western models of school counseling there are dangers of overlooking unique cultural and family aspects of Lebanese society.


=== Lithuania ===
School counseling was introduced in 1931 but disappeared during World War II.


=== Macau ===
Macau mandates school counseling.


=== Malaysia ===
Malaysia mandates school counseling in middle and high school.


=== Malta ===
In Malta, school counseling services began in 1968 in the Department of Education based on recommendations from a UNESCO consultant and used these titles: Education Officer, School Counsellor, and Guidance Teacher. Through the 1990s they included school counselor positions in primary and trade schools in addition to secondary schools. Guidance teachers are mandated at a 1:300 teacher to student ratio. Malta mandates school counseling.


=== Nepal ===
Nepal mandates school counseling.


=== New Zealand ===
New Zealand mandates school counseling but since 1988 when education was decentralized, there has been a decline in the prevalence of school counselors and the quality and service delivery of school counseling.


=== Nigeria ===
In Nigeria, school counseling began in 1959 in some high schools. It rarely exists at the elementary level. Where there are federally funded secondary schools, there are some professionally trained school counselors. However, in many cases, teachers function as career educators. School counselors often have teaching and other responsibilities that take time away from their school counseling tasks. The Counseling Association of Nigeria (CASSON) was formed in 1976 to promote the profession, but there is no code of ethics. However, a certification/licensure board has been formed. Aluede, Adomeh, & Afen-Akpaida (2004) discussed the over-reliance on textbooks from the US and the need for school counselors in Nigeria to take a whole-school approach, lessen individual approaches, and honor the traditional African world view valuing the family and community's roles in decision-making as paramount for effective decision-making in schools.


=== Norway ===
Norway mandates school counseling.


=== Oman ===
There are some school counseling services at the high school level.


=== Philippines ===
The Philippines mandates school counseling in middle and high school. The Congress of the Philippines passed the Guidance and Counseling Act of 2004 with a specific focus on Professional Practice, Ethics, National Certification, and the creation of a Regulatory Body, and specialists in school counseling are subject to this law.


=== Poland ===
School counseling was introduced in 1918 but disappeared during World War II.


=== Portugal ===
Portugal mandates school counseling at the high school level.


=== Romania ===
Romania mandates school counseling.


=== Rwanda ===
School counseling focuses on trauma-based counseling
It focuses on academic performance, preventiong and intervention with HIV/AIDS, and establishing 
peace-building clubs


=== Saudi Arabia ===
School counseling is developing in Saudi Arabia. In 2010, 90% of high schools had some type of school counseling service.


=== Serbia ===
School counseling is available in certain schools.


=== Singapore ===
Singapore mandates school counseling.


=== Slovakia ===
Slovakia mandates school counseling.


=== South Korea ===
In South Korea, school counselors must teach a subject besides counseling, but not all school counselors are appointed to counseling positions, even though Korean law requires school counselors in all middle and high schools.


=== Spain ===
Spain provides school counseling at the high school level although it is unclear if mandated. There was around one counselor for every 1,000 primary and secondary (high school) students as of 2018.


=== St. Kitts ===
St. Kitts mandates school counseling.


=== Sweden ===
Sweden mandates school counseling.In Sweden, school counselors' work was divided into two work groups in the 1970s. The work groups are called "kurator" and "studie -och yrkesvägledare."  They worked with communication methodology but the kurator's work is more therapeutic, often psychological and social-emotional issues, and the studie-och yrkesvägledare's work is future-focused with educational and career development. Studie- och yrkesvägledaren work in primary, secondary, adult education, higher education and various training centers and most have a Bachelor of Arts degree in Study and Career Guidance.


=== Switzerland ===
School counseling is found at the high school level.


=== Syria ===
School counseling has focused on trauma-based counseling of students. Prior to the war it was done in schools but it is now found in either a school club or refugee camp sponsored and staffed by UNICEF.


=== Taiwan ===
In Taiwan, school counseling traditionally was done by "guidance teachers." Recent advocacy by the Chinese Guidance and Counseling Association pushed for licensure for school counselors in Taiwan's public schools. Prior to this time, the focus had been primarily individual and group counseling, play therapy, career counseling and development, and stress related to national university examinations.


=== Tanzania ===
Tanzania mandates school counseling 


=== Thailand ===
The Thai government has put substantial funding into school counseling but does not mandate it.


=== Trinidad and Tobago ===
Trinidad and Tobago mandate school counseling.


=== Turkey ===
Turkey mandates school counseling and it is in all schools.


=== Uganda ===
Uganda mandates school counseling.


=== United Arab Emirates ===
There is some school counseling at the high-school level in the United Arab Emirates.


=== United Kingdom ===
School counseling originated in the UK to support underachieving students and involved specialist training for teachers. Wales and Northern Ireland require school counseling.


=== United States ===
In the United States, the school counseling profession began with the vocational guidance movement in the early 20th century now known as career development. Jesse B. Davis was the first to provide a systematic school counseling program focused on career development. In 1907, he became the principal of a high school and encouraged the school English teachers to use compositions and lessons to relate career interests, develop character, and avoid behavioral problems. Many others during this time focused on what is now called career development. For example, in 1908, Frank Parsons, "Father of Career Counseling" established the Bureau of Vocational Guidance to assist young people transition from school to work.
From the 1920s to the 1930s, school counseling grew because of the rise of progressive education in schools. This movement emphasized personal, social, and moral development. Many schools reacted to this movement as anti-educational, saying that schools should teach only the fundamentals of education. Combined with the economic hardship of the Great Depression, both challenges led to a decline in school counseling. At the same time, the National Association for College Admission Counseling was established as the first professional association focused on counseling and advising high school students into college.  In the early 1940s,  the school counseling movement was influenced by the need for counselors to help assess students for  wartime needs.  At the same time, researcher Carl Rogers' emphasized the power of non-directive helping relationships and counseling for all ages and the profession of counseling was influenced to shift from  directive "guidance" to non-directive or person-centered "counseling" as the basis for school counseling.
In the 1950s the government established the Guidance and Personnel Services Section in the Division of State and Local School Systems. In 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik I. Out of concern that the Russians were winning the space race and that there were not enough scientists and mathematicians, the government passed the National Defense Education Act, spurring growth in vocational and career counseling through larger funding. In the 1950s the American School Counselor Association (ASCA) was founded as one of the early divisions of what is now known as the American Counseling Association (ACA).
In the 1960s, new legislation and professional developments refined the school counseling profession (Schmidt, 2003). The 1960s continued large amounts of federal funding for land-grant colleges and universities to establish Counselor Education master's and doctoral programs. School counseling shifted from a primary focus on career development to adding social-emotional issues paralleling the rise of social justice and civil rights movements. In the early 1970s, Dr. Norm Gysbers's research and advocacy helped the profession shift from school counselors as solitary professionals focused on individual academic, career, and social-emotional student issues to a comprehensive developmental school counseling program for all students K-12 that included individual and group counseling for some students and classroom lessons and annual advising/planning and activities for every student. He and his colleagues' research evidenced strong correlations between fully implemented school counseling programs and student academic success; a critical part of the evidence base for the school counseling profession was their work in Missouri. Dr. Chris Sink & associates showed similar evidence-based success for school counseling programs at the elementary and middle school levels in Washington State.
School counseling in the 1980s and early 1990s was not influenced by corporate educational reform efforts. The profession had little evidence of systemic effectiveness for school counselors and only correlational evidence of the effectiveness of school counseling programs. In response,consulted with elementary, middle, and high school counselors and created the American School Counselor Association (ASCA) Student Standards with three core domains (Academic, Career, Personal/Social), nine standards, and specific competencies and indicators for K-12 students. There was no research base, however, for school counseling standards as an effective educational reform strategy. A year later, Whiston & Sexton published the first systemic meta-analysis of school counseling outcome research in academic, career, and personal/social domains and individual counseling, group counseling, classroom lesson, and parent/guardian workshop effectiveness.In the late 1990s, former mathematics teacher, school counselor, and administrator Pat Martin, was hired by corporate-funded educational reform group The Education Trust to focus the school counseling profession on equity issues by helping close achievement and opportunity gaps harming children and adolescents of color, poor and working class children and adolescents, bilingual children and adolescents, and children and adolescents with disabilities. Martin, under considerable heat from Counselor Educators who were not open to her equity-focused message of change, developed focus groups of K-12 students, parents, guardians, teachers, building leaders, and superintendents, and interviewed professors of School Counselor Education. She hired Oregon State University School Counselor Education professor emeritus Dr. Reese House, and after several years of work in the late 1990s they created, in 2003, the National Center for Transforming School Counseling (NCTSC).
The NCTSC focused on changing school counselor education at the graduate level and changing school counselor practice in state and local districts to teach school counselors how to help recognize, prevent, and close achievement and opportunity gaps. In their initial focus groups, they found what Hart & Jacobi had indicated years earlier—-too many school counselors were gatekeepers for the status quo instead of advocates for the academic success of every child and adolescent. Too many school counselors used inequitable practices, supported inequitable school policies, and were unwilling to change.
This professional behavior kept many students from non-dominant backgrounds (i.e., students of color, poor and working class students, students with disabilities, and bilingual students) from receiving challenging coursework (AP, IB, and honors classes) and academic, career, and college access/affordability/admission skills needed to successfully graduate from high school and pursue post-secondary options including college. In 1998, the Education Trust received a grant from the DeWitt Wallace/Reader's Digest to fund six $500,000 grants for Counselor Education/School Counseling programs, with a focus on rural and urban settings, to transform School Counselor Education programs to teach advocacy, leadership, teaming and collaboration, equity assessment using data, and culturally competent program counseling and coordination skills in addition to counseling: Indiana State University, the University of Georgia, the University of West Georgia, the University of California-Northridge, the University of North Florida, and, the Ohio State University were the recipients. Over 25 additional Counselor Education/School Counseling programs nationwide became companion institutions in the following decade with average grants of $3000. By 2008, NCTSC consultants had worked in over 100 school districts and major cities and rural areas to transform the work of school counselors nationwide.
In 2002, the American School Counselor Association released Dr. Trish Hatch and Dr. Judy Bowers' work: the ASCA National Model: A framework for school counseling programs comprising key school counseling components: ASCA National Standards, and the skill-based focus for closing achievement and opportunity gaps from the Education Trust's new vision of school counseling into one document. The model drew from major theoreticians in school counseling with four key areas: Foundation (school counseling program mission statements, vision, statements, belief statements, and annual goals); Delivery (direct services including individual and group counseling; classroom counseling lessons; planning and advising for all students); Management (use of action plans and results reports for closing gaps, small group work and classroom lessons; a school counseling program assessment, an administrator-school counselor annual agreement, a time-tracker tool, and a school counseling data tool; and Accountability (school counselor annual evaluation and use of a School Counseling Program Advisory Council to monitor data, outcomes, and effectiveness). In 2003, Dr. Jay Carey and Dr. Carey Dimmitt created the Center for School Counseling Outcome Research and Evaluation (CSCORE) at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst  as a clearinghouse for evidence-based practice with regular research briefs, original research projects, and eventual co-sponsorship of the annual Evidence-Based School Counseling conference in 2013.
In 2004, the ASCA Ethical Standards for School Counselors was revised to focus on issues of equity, closing achievement and opportunity gaps, and ensuring all K-12 students received access to a school counseling program. Also in 2004, an equity-focused entity on school counselors' role in college readiness and admission counseling, the National Office for School Counselor Advocacy (NOSCA) emerged at The College Board led by Pat Martin and Dr. Vivian Lee. NOSCA developed scholarships for research on college counseling by K-12 school counselors taught in School Counselor Education programs.
In 2008, the first NOSCA study was released by Dr. Jay Carey and colleagues focused on innovations in selected College Board "Inspiration Award" schools where school counselors collaborated inside and outside their schools for high college-going rates and strong college-going cultures in schools with large numbers of students of non-dominant backgrounds. In 2008, ASCA released School Counseling Competencies focused on assisting school counseling programs to effectively implement the ASCA National Model.In 2010, the Center for Excellence in School Counseling and Leadership (CESCAL) at San Diego State University co-sponsored the first of four school counselor and educator conferences devoted to the needs of lesbian, bisexual, gay, and transgender students in San Diego, California. ASCA published a 5th edition of the ASCA Ethical Standards for School Counselors.In 2011, Counseling at the Crossroads: The perspectives and promise of school counselors in American education, the largest survey of high school and middle school counselors in the United States with over 5,300 interviews, was released by Pat Martin and Dr. Vivian Lee by the National Office for School Counselor Advocacy, the National Association of Secondary School Principals, and the American School Counselor Association. The study shared school counselors' views on educational policies, practices, and reform, and how many of them, especially in urban and rural school settings, were not given the chance to focus on what they were trained to do, especially career and college access and readiness counseling for all students, in part due to high caseloads and inappropriate tasks.
School counselors suggested changes in their role to be accountable for success of all students and how school systems needed to change so school counselors could be key advocates and leaders for every student's success. Implications for public policy and district and school-wide change were addressed. The National Center for Transforming School Counseling released a brief, Poised to Lead: How School Counselors Can Drive Career and College Readiness, challenging all schools to utilize school counselors for equity and access for challenging coursework (AP, IB, honors) for all students and ensuring college and career access skills and competencies as a major focus for school counselors K-12.In 2012, CSCORE assisted in evaluating and publishing six statewide research studies assessing the effectiveness of school counseling programs based on statewide systemic use of school counseling programs such as the ASCA National Model and published their outcomes in the American School Counselor Association research journal Professional School Counseling. Research indicated strong correlational evidence between fully implemented school counseling programs and low school counselor-to-student ratios provided better student academic success, greater career and college access/readiness/admission, and reduced social-emotional issue concerns included better school safety, reduced disciplinary issues, and better attendance.Also in 2012, the American School Counselor Association released the third edition of the ASCA National Model.From 2014-16, the White House, under the Office of the First Lady Michelle Obama, partnered with key school counselor educators and college access professionals nationwide to focus on the roles of school counselors and college access professionals. Their collaboration resulted in a series of national Reach Higher/School Counseling and College Access convenings at Harvard University, San Diego State University, the University of North Florida, and American University. Michelle Obama and her staff also began the Reach Higher and Better Make Room programs to focus on college access for underrepresented students, and she began hosting the American School Counselor Association's School Counselor of the Year awards ceremony at the White House. The initiatives culminated in an unprecedented collaboration among multiple major professional associations focused on school counseling and college access including the American Counseling Association, the American School Counselor Association, the National Association for College Admission Counseling, the College Board, and ACT raising the profile and prominence of the role of school counselors collaborating on college access, affordability, and admission for all students.In 2015, ASCA replaced the ASCA National with the evidence-based ASCA Mindsets & Behaviors for Student Success: K-12 College and Career Readiness Standards for Every Student, created from meta-analyses done by the University of Chicago's Consortium on Educational Reform showing key components of raising student academic success over multiple well-designed research studies. While an improvement over the lack os research in the ASCA student standards that they replaced, school counselors have shared feedback that they do not go into enough depth for career, college access/admission/affordability, and social-emotional competencies.
In 2016, ASCA published a newly revised sixth version of the ASCA Ethical Standards for School Counselors using two rounds of feedback from practicing school counselors in all 50 states; it also included, for the first time, a Glossary of ethical terms for heightened clarity.In 2018, in response to a call from a report issued from the Reach Higher initiative, American University created the Center for Post-Secondary Readiness and Success, a national research center charged with identifying new and effective models to strengthen post-secondary pathways for all students, especially low-income and first-generation students. The Center is directed by School Counseling Research professor Dr. Laura Owen.In 2019, ASCA released the 4th edition of the ASCA Model, a Framework for School Counseling Programs. Changes included fewer templates and combined templates from the 3rd edition after school counselor feedback that the 3rd edition had become too complex and onerous. The four outside-the-diamond skills from the first three editions: advocacy, leadership, teaming and collaboration, and systemic change are now incorpated throughout the model and no longer part of the diamond graphic organizer. The four quadrants of the model have been changed to verbs and action-oriented words to better clarify the key components:
1. Define (formerly Foundation)
2. Deliver (formerly Delivery System)
3. Manage (formerly Management System)
4. Assess (forrmerly Accountability System).
The three types of data collected by school counselors in school counseling programs have shifted in name to 
1. Participation data (formerly process)
2. Mindsets & Behaviors data (formerly perception, i.e., learning)
3. Outcome data (results)
The 4th edition, while easier to read and use than prior editions, does not cover the history of how the model has changed over time and neglects any mention of the original authors, Drs. Trish Hatch and Judy Bowers.


=== Venezuela ===
School counseling is mandated in Venezuela and it has focused on cultural competency.


=== Vietnam ===
School counseling is mandated in Vietnam.


== Roles, school counseling programs, ethics, and school counseling professional associations ==
Professional school counselors ideally implement a school counseling program that promotes and enhances student achievement (Hatch & Bowers, 2003, 2005; ASCA, 2012).
A framework for appropriate and inappropriate school counselor responsibilities and roles is outlined in the ASCA National Model (Hatch & Bowers, 2003, 2005; ASCA, 2012). School counselors, in most USA states, usually have a master's degree in school counseling from a Counselor Education graduate program. China requires at least three years of college experience. In Japan, school counselors were added in the mid-1990s, part-time, primarily focused on behavioral issues. In Taiwan, they are often teachers with recent legislation requiring school counseling licensure focused on individual and group counseling for academic, career, and personal issues. In Korea, school counselors are mandated in middle and high schools.
School counselors are employed in elementary, middle, and high schools, and in district supervisory settings and in counselor education faculty positions (usually with an earned Ph.D. in Counselor Education in the USA or related graduate doctorates abroad), and post-secondary settings doing academic, career, college readiness, and personal/social counseling, consultation, and program coordination. Their work includes a focus on developmental stages of student growth, including the needs, tasks, and student interests related to those stages(Schmidt, 2003).
Professional school counselors meet the needs of student in three basic domains: academic development, career development, and social-emotional development (Dahir & Campbell, 1997; Hatch & Bowers, 2003, 2005; ASCA, 2012) with an increased emphasis on college access.  Knowledge, understanding and skill in these domains are developed through classroom instruction, appraisal, consultation, counseling, coordination, and collaboration.  For example, in appraisal, school counselors may use a variety of personality and career assessment methods (such as the or (based on the) to help students explore career and college needs and interests.
Schools play a key role in assessment, access to services, and possible referral to appropriate outside support systems. They provide intervention, prevention, and services to support students academic and career education as well as personal and social growth. The role of school guidance counsellors is expansive. As outlined in publicly accessible provincial guidelines for Canadian school counsellors, on top of providing classroom guidance curriculum, Canadian counsellors are providing counselling services, addressing mental health issues, crisis intervention, and support for course selection. The guidelines suggest that counsellors should consult with all stakeholders to support student needs. In Ontario's education policies, counsellors also play a key role in other forms of experiential learning, such cooperative education, as well as supporting students in Specialist High Skills Majors programs.School counselor interventions include individual and group counseling for some students.  For example, if a student's behavior is interfering with his or her achievement, the school counselor may observe that student in a class, provide consultation to teachers and other stakeholders to develop (with the student) a plan to address the behavioral issue(s), and then collaborate to implement and evaluate the plan. They also provide consultation services to family members such as college access, career development, parenting skills, study skills, child and adolescent development, and help with school-home transitions.
School counselor interventions for all students include annual academic/career/college access planning K-12 and leading classroom developmental lessons on academic, career/college, and social-emotional topics.  The topics of character education, diversity and multiculturalism (Portman, 2009), and school safety are important areas of focus for school counselors. Often school counselors will coordinate outside groups that wish to help with student needs such as academics, or coordinate a program that teaches about child abuse or drugs, through on-stage drama (Schmidt, 2003).
School counselors develop, implement, and evaluate school counseling programs that deliver academic, career, college access/affordability/admission, and social-emotional competencies to all students in their schools. For example, the ASCA National Model (Hatch & Bowers, 2003, 2005; ASCA, 2012) includes the following four main areas:
Foundation (Define as of 2019) - a school counseling program mission statement, a vision statement, a beliefs statement, SMART Goals; ASCA Mindsets & Behaviors & ASCA Code of Ethics;
Delivery System (Deliver as of 2019) - how school counseling core curriculum lessons, planning for every student, and individual and group counseling are delivered in direct and indirect services to students (80% of school counselor time);
Management System (Manage as of 2019) - calendars; use of data tool; use of time tool; administrator-school counselor agreement; school counseling program advisory council; small group, school counseling core curriculum, and closing the gap action plans; and
Accountability System (Assess as of 2019) - school counseling program assessment; small group, school counseling core curriculum, and closing-the-gap results reports; and school counselor performance evaluations based on school counselor competencies.The school counseling program model (ASCA, 2012, 2019) is implemented using key skills from the National Center for Transforming School Counseling's Transforming School Counseling Initiative:  Advocacy, Leadership, Teaming and Collaboration, and Systemic Change.
Many provinces in Canada offer a career pathway program, which helps to prepare students for the employment market and support a smooth school-to-work transition. In a Canadian wide study, 46% of school guidance counsellors suggest that there is a mandatory career education course provided in their schools. Ontario is the highest province with a mandatory course, which is provided at the secondary levelSchool Counselors are expected to follow a professional code of ethics in many countries. For example, In the US, they are the American School Counselor Association (ASCA) School Counselor Ethical Code, the American Counseling Association (ACA) Code of Ethics., and the National Association for College Admission Counseling (NACAC) Statement of Principles of Good Practice (SPGP).There is much research to suggest that school counsellors experience role confusion, given the many tasks they are expected to perform. A potential contributor to this role confusion stems from the demands on the counsellor to be a generalist who performs roles in leadership, advocacy, essential services and curriculum development. Additionally, Canadian counsellors find that they are stretched too thin to provide mental health support on top of their other duties and that they oftentimes experience a lack of resources. They are burdened by a workload that negatively impacts their ability to meet students needs.The role of a school counselor is critical. The roles of school counselors are expanding and changing with time As roles change, school counselors help students prosper in academics, career, post-secondary, and social-emotional domians. School counselors reduce and bridge the inequalities facing students in educational systems.School Counselors around the world are affiliated with various national and regional school counseling associations, and must abide by their guideline. These associations include:

African Counseling Association (AfCA)
Asociacion Argentina de Counselors (AAC-Argentina)
Associacao Portuguesa de Psicoterapia centrada na Pessoa e de Counselling (APPCPC-Portugal)
Australian Guidance and Counselling Association (AGCA)
Hong Kong Association of Guidance Masters and Career Masters (HKAGMCM)
Cypriot Association of School Guidance Counsellors (OELMEK)
European Counseling Association (ECA)
France Ministry of Education
Hellenic Society of Counselling and Guidance (HESCOG-Greece)
International Baccalaureate (IB)
International Vanguard of Counsellors (IVC)
International Association for Educational and Vocational Guidance (IAEVG)
Association Internationale d'Orientation Scolaire et Professionnelle (AIOSP)
Internationale Vereinigung für Schul- und Berufsberatung (IVSBB)
Asociación Internacional para la Orientación Educativa y Profesional(AIOEP)
Institute of Guidance Counselors (IGC) (Ireland)
Kenya Association of Professional Counselors (KAPC)
Department of Education-Malta
New Zealand Association of Counsellors/Te Roopu Kaiwhiriwhiri o Aotearoa (NZAC)
Counseling Association of Nigeria (CASSON)
Philippine Guidance and Counseling Association (PGCA)
Counseling & Psychotherapy in Scotland (COSCA)
Singapore Association for Counseling (SAC)
Federacion Espanola de Orientacion y Psicopedagogia (FEOP-Spain)
the Taiwan Guidance and Counseling Association (TGCA)
Counselling Children and Young People (BACP affiliate, UK)
British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP-UK)
American Counseling Association (ACA-USA)
American School Counselor Association (ASCA-USA)
Center for Excellence in School Counseling and Leadership(CESCaL) (USA)
Center for School Counseling Outcome Research (CSCOR-USA) Council for the Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP-USA and international)
National Board for Certified Counselors (NBCC, USA)
National Office for School Counselor Advocacy (NOSCA) at The College Board (USA)
National Center for Transforming School Counseling (NCTSC) at The Education Trust (USA)
Overseas Association of College Admissions Counselors (OACAC an affiliate of National Association of College Admissions Counselors-USA)
Canadian Counselling and Psychotherapy Association - National School Counsellors Chapter (CPPA)
Newfoundland and Labrador Counsellors’ and Psychologists’ Association
PEI Counselling Association
British Columbia School Counsellors
Guidance Council of the Alberta Teacher's Association
Ontario School Counsellors’ Association
Nova Scotia School Counsellors Association


=== Elementary school counseling ===
Elementary school counselors provide academic, career, college access, and personal and social competencies and planning to all students, and individual and group counseling for some students and their families to meet the developmental needs of young children K-6. Transitions from pre-school to elementary school and from elementary school to middle school are an important focus for elementary school counselors. Increased emphasis is placed on accountability for closing achievement and opportunity gaps at the elementary level as more school counseling programs move to evidence-based work with data and specific results.School counseling programs that deliver specific competencies to all students help to close achievement and opportunity gaps. To facilitate individual and group school counseling interventions, school counselors use developmental, cognitive-behavioral, person-centered (Rogerian) listening and influencing skills, systemic, family, multicultural, narrative, and play therapy theories and techniques. released a research study showing the effectiveness of elementary school counseling programs in Washington state.


=== Middle school counseling ===
Middle school  counselors provide school counseling curriculum lessons on academic, career, college access, and personal and social competencies, advising and academic/career/college access planning to all students and individual and group counseling for some students and their families to meet the needs of older children/early adolescents in grades 7 and 8.Middle School College Access curricula have been developed by The College Board to assist students and their families well before reaching high school. To facilitate the school counseling process, school counselors use theories and techniques including developmental, cognitive-behavioral, person-centered (Rogerian) listening and influencing skills, systemic, family, multicultural, narrative, and play therapy.  Transitional issues to ensure successful transitions to high school are a key area including career exploration and assessment with seventh and eighth grade students. Sink, Akos, Turnbull, & Mvududu released a study in 2008 confirming the effectiveness of middle school comprehensive school counseling programs in Washington state.


=== High school counseling ===
High school counselors provide academic, career, college access, and personal and social competencies with developmental classroom lessons and planning to all students, and individual and group counseling for some students and their families to meet the developmental needs of adolescents (Hatch & Bowers, 2003, 2005, 2012). Emphasis is on college access counseling at the early high school level as more school counseling programs move to evidence-based work with data and specific results that show how school counseling programs help to close achievement, opportunity, and attainment gaps ensuring all students have access to school counseling programs and early college access activities. The breadth of demands high school counselors face, from educational attainment (high school graduation and some students' preparation for careers and college) to student social and mental health, has led to ambiguous role definition. Summarizing a 2011 national survey of more than 5,330 middle school and high school counselors, researchers argued: "Despite the aspirations of counselors to effectively help students succeed in school and fulfill their dreams, the mission and roles of counselors in the education system must be more clearly defined; schools must create measures of accountability to track their effectiveness; and policymakers and key stakeholders must integrate counselors into reform efforts to maximize their impact in schools across America".Transitional issues to ensure successful transitions to college, other post-secondary educational options, and careers are a key area. The high school counselor helps students and their families prepare for post-secondary education including college and careers (e.g. college, careers) by engaging students and their families in accessing and evaluating accurate information on what the National Office for School Counselor Advocacy calls the 8 essential elements of college and career counseling: (1) College Aspirations, (2) Academic Planning for Career and College Readiness, (3) Enrichment and Extracurricular Engagement, (4) College and Career Exploration and Selection Processes, (5) College and Career Assessments, (6) College Affordability Planning, (7) College and Career Admission Processes, and (8) Transition from High School Graduation to College Enrollment. Some students turn to private college admissions advisors but there is no research evidence that private college admissions advisors have any effectiveness in assisting students attain selective college admissions.
Lapan, Gysbers & Sun showed correlational evidence of the effectiveness of fully implemented school counseling programs on high school students' academic success. Carey et al.'s 2008 study showed specific best practices from high school counselors raising college-going rates within a strong college-going environment in multiple USA-based high schools with large numbers of students of nondominant cultural identities.


== Education credentials, certification, and accreditation ==
The education of school counselors (school counsellors) around the world varies based on the laws and cultures of countries and the historical influences of their educational and credentialing systems and professional identities related to who delivers academic, career, college readiness, and personal/social information, advising, curriculum, and counseling and related services.In Canada, the educational requirements to become a school guidance counsellor vary by province. Below is an overview of the general provincial requirements for school counsellors:

In China, there is no national certification or licensure system for school counselors.
Korea requires school counselors in all middle and high schools.In the Philippines, school counselors must be licensed with a master's degree in counseling.Taiwan instituted school counselor licensure for public schools (2006) through advocacy from theIn the US, a school counselor is a certified  educator with a master's degree in school counseling (usually from a Counselor Education graduate program) with school counseling graduate training including qualifications and skills to address all students’ academic, career, college access and personal/social needs. Once you have completed your master's degree you can take one of 2 certification options in order to become fully licensed as a professional school counselor.Over half of all Counselor Education programs that offer school counseling are accredited by the Council on the Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP) and all in the US with one in Canada. In 2010 one was under review in Mexico. CACREP maintains a current list of accredited programs and programs in the accreditation process on their website. CACREP desires to accredit more international counseling university programs.According to CACREP, an accredited school counseling program offers coursework in Professional Identity and Ethics, Human Development, Counseling Theories, Group Work, Career Counseling, Multicultural Counseling,  Assessment, Research and Program Evaluation, and Clinical Coursework—a 100-hour practicum and a 600-hour internship under supervision of a school counseling faculty member and a certified school counselor site supervisor (CACREP, 2001).
When CACREP released the 2009 Standards, the accreditation process became performance-based including evidence of school counselor candidate learning outcomes. In addition, CACREP tightened the school counseling standards with specific evidence needed for how school counseling students receive education in foundations; counseling prevention and intervention; diversity and advocacy; assessment; research and evaluation; academic development; collaboration and consultation; and leadership in K-12 school counseling contexts.Certification practices for school counselors vary internationally. School counselors in the USA may opt for national certification through two different boards. The National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) requires a two-to-three year process of performance based assessment, and demonstrate (in writing) content knowledge in human growth/development, diverse populations, school counseling programs, theories, data, and change and collaboration. In February 2005, 30 states offered financial incentives for this certification.
Also in the US, The National Board for Certified Counselors (NBCC) requires passing the National Certified School Counselor Examination (NCSC), including 40 multiple choice questions and seven simulated cases assessing school counselors' abilities to make critical decisions.  Additionally, a master's degree and three years of supervised experience are required. NBPTS also requires three years of experience, however state certification is required (41 of 50 states require a master's degree). At least four states offer financial incentives for the NCSC certification.


== Job growth and earnings ==
The rate of job growth and earnings for school counselors depends on the country that one is employed in and how the school is funded—public or independent. School counselors working in international schools or "American" schools globally may find similar work environments and expectations to the USA. School counselor pay varies based on school counselor roles, identity, expectations, and legal and certification requirements and expectations of each country. According to the Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH), the median salary for school counselors in the US in 2010 was (USD) $53,380 or $25.67 hourly. According to an infographic designed by Wake Forest University, the median salary of school counselors in the US was $43,690. The USA has 267,000 employees in titles such as school counselor or related titles in education and advising and college and career counseling. The projected growth for school counselors is 14-19% or faster than average than other occupations in the US with a predicted 94,000 job openings from 2008-2018. In Australia, a survey by the Australian Guidance and Counseling Association found that school counselor salary ranged from (AUD) the high 50,000s to the mid 80,000s.
Among all counseling specialty areas, public elementary, middle and high school counselors are (2009) paid the highest salary on average of all counselors. Budget cuts, however, have affected placement of public school counselors in Canada, Ireland, the United States, and other countries. In the United States, rural areas and urban areas traditionally have been under-served by school counselors in public schools due to both funding shortages and often a lack of best practice models. With the expectation of school counselors to work with data, research, and evidence-based practice, school counselors who show and share results in assisting to close achievement, opportunity, and attainment gaps are in the best position to argue for increased school counseling resources and positions for their programs (Hatch & Bowers, 2003, 2005; ASCA, 2012).


== Notable school counselors ==
Fernando Cabrera, US politician
Ern Condon, Canadian politician
Derrick Dalley, Canadian politician
Susie Sadlowski Garza, US politician
François Gendron, Canadian politician
Steve Lindberg, US politician
Lillian Ortiz-Self, US politician
Tony Resch, US lacrosse player
Tom Tillberry, US politician
Tom Villa, US politician


== See also ==

Advocacy
Career counseling
Career development
Character education
Counseling
Counselor education
Education
Educational equity
Educational leadership
Frank Parsons
List of counseling topics
Mental health counseling
Multicultural education
Play therapy
School social worker
School psychology
Social justice
Teacher


== References ==


=== Evidence- and research-based school counseling articles, books, DVDs ===


==== Abilities, disabilities, gifts, talents, and special education in school counseling ====
Bauman, S. S. M. (2010). "School counselors and survivors of childhood cancer: Reconceptualizing and advancing the cure". Professional School Counseling. 14 (2): 156–164. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.2.k047w39u78hm1713.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Erford, B. T.; Erford, B. M.; Lattanzi, G.; Weller, J.; Schein, H.; Wolf, E.; Hughes, M.; Darrow, J.; Savin-Murphy, J.; Peacock, E. (2011). "Counseling outcomes from 1990 to 2008 for school-age youth with depression: A meta-analysis". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89 (4): 439–458. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.2011.tb02841.x.
Hamlet, H. S.; Gergar, P. G.; Shaefer, B. A. (2011). "Students living with chronic illness: The school counselor's role". Professional School Counseling. 14: 202–210. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-14.202.
Krell, M.; Perusse, R. (2012). "Providing college readiness counseling for students with Autism spectrum disorders: A Delphi study to guide school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 16: 29–39. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.29.
Marshak, L. E., Dandeneau, C. J., Prezant, F. P., & L'Amoreaux, N. A. (2009). The school counselor's guide to helping students with disabilities. San Francisco, CA:  Jossey-Bass.
Milsom, A (2007). "Interventions to assist students with disabilities through school transitions". Professional School Counseling. 10 (3): 273–278. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.3.c322443236564507.
Milsom, A (2006). "Creating positive school experiences for students with disabilities". Professional School Counseling. 10: 66–72. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.1.ek6317552h2kh4m6.
Milsom, A.; Dietz, L. (2009). "Defining college readiness for students with learning disabilities: A Delphi study". Professional School Counseling. 12 (4): 315–323. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.315.
Peterson, J. S. (2006). "Addressing counseling needs of gifted students". Professional School Counseling. 10: 43–51. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.1.b76h32717q632tqn.
Trolley, B. C., Haas, H. S., & Patti, D. C. (2009). The school counselor's guide to special education. Thousand Oaks, CA:  Corwin Press.
Wood, S. M. (2010). "Best practices in counseling the gifted in schools: What's really happening". Gifted Child Quarterly. 54: 42–58. doi:10.1177/0016986209352681.
Wood, S. M. (2010). "Nurturing a garden: A qualitative investigation into school counselors' experiences with gifted students". Journal for the Education of the Gifted. 34: 261–302.
Wood, S. M. (2009). "Counseling concerns of gifted and talented adolescents: Implications for school counselors". Journal of School Counseling. 7: 1.
Wood, S. M.; Portman, T.; Cigrand, D. L.; Colangelo, N. (2010). "School counselors' perceptions and experience with acceleration as a program option for gifted and talented students". Gifted Child Quarterly. 54 (3): 168–178. doi:10.1177/0016986210367940.


==== Academic interventions, closing achievement gaps ====
Blanco, P. J.; Ray, D. C. (2011). "Play therapy in elementary schools: A best practice for improving academic achievement". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89 (2): 235–243. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00083.x.
Bodenhorn, N.; Wolfe, E. W.; Airen, O. E. (2010). "School counselor program choice and self-efficacy: Relationship to achievement gap and equity". Professional School Counseling. 13 (3): 165–174. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.165.
Brigman, G. A.; Campbell, C. (2003). "Helping students improve academic achievement and school success behavior". Professional School Counseling. 7: 91–98.
Brigman, G. A.; Webb, L. D.; Campbell, C. (2007). "Building skills for school success: Improving the academic and social competence of students". Professional School Counseling. 10 (3): 279–288. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.3.v850256191627227.
Bruce, A. M.; Getch, Y. Q.; Ziomek-Daigle, J. (2009). "Closing the gap: A group counseling approach to improve test performance of African-American students". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 450–457. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.450.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Cholewa, B.; West-Olatunji, C. (2008). "Exploring the relationship among cultural discontinuity, psychological distress, and academic achievement outcomes for low-income, culturally diverse students". Professional School Counseling. 12: 54–61. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.54.
Hatch, T. (2014). "The use of data in school counseling: Hatching results for students programs, and the profession." Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Holcomb-McCoy, C. (2007). School counseling to close the achievement gap: A social justice framework for success. Thousand Oaks, CA:  Corwin Press.
Holcomb-McCoy, C (2007). "Transitioning to high school: Issues and challenges for African American students". Professional School Counseling. 10 (3): 253–260. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.3.t786743452x51lk2.
Jeynes, W (2007). "The relationship between parental involvement and urban secondary school student academic achievement: A meta-analysis". Urban Education. 42: 82–110. doi:10.1177/0042085906293818.
Johnson, R. S. (2002). Using data to close the achievement gap: How to measure equity in our schools. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Mason, E. C. M.; Ockerman, M. S.; Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). "Change-Agent-for-Equity (CAFE) model: A framework for school counselor identity" (PDF). Journal of School Counseling. 11: 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-08.
Miranda, A.; Webb, L.; Brigman, G.; Peluso, P. (2007). "Student success skills: A promising program to close the academic achievement gaps of African American and Latino Students". Professional School Counseling. 10 (5): 490–497. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.5.rx6g3g7141w2310q.
Newman, B. M.; Lohman, B. J.; Myers, M. C.; Newman, P. R. (2000). "Experiences of urban youth navigating the transition to ninth grade". Journal of Youth and Society. 31 (4): 387–416. doi:10.1177/0044118x00031004001.
Newman, B. M.; Myers, M.C.; Newman, P. R.; Lohman, B. J.; Smith, V. L. (2000). "The transition to high school for academically promising, urban, low-income African American youth". Adolescence. 35 (137): 45–66. PMID 10841296.
Poynton, T. A.; Carlson, M. W.; Hopper, J. A.; Carey, J. C. (2006). "Evaluating the impact of an innovative approach to integrate conflict resolution into the academic curriculum on middle school students' academic achievement". Professional School Counseling. 9: 190–196. doi:10.5330/prsc.9.3.l6012ln4661857u3.
Schellenberg, R.; Grothaus, T. (2011). "Using culturally competent responsive services to improve student achievement and behavior". Professional School Counseling. 14: 222–230. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-14.222.
Schellenberg, R.; Grothaus, T. (2009). "Promoting cultural responsiveness and closing the achievement gap with standards blending". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 440–449. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.440.
Schellenberg, R. (2008). The new school counselor: Strategies for universal academic achievement. Lanham, MD: Rowman Littlefield Education.
Sciarra, D. T. (2010). "Predictive factors in intensive math course-taking in high school". Professional School Counseling. 13 (3): 196–207. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.196.
Squier, K. L., Nailor, P., & Carey, J. C. (2014). Achieving excellence in school counseling through motivation, self-direction, self-knowledge, and relationships. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Suh, S.; Suh, J.; Houston, I. (2007). "Predictors of categorical at–risk high school dropouts". Journal of Counseling and Development. 85 (2): 196–203. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2007.tb00463.x.
Suh, S.; Suh, J. (2007). "Risk factors and levels of risk for high school dropouts". Professional School Counseling. 10 (3): 297–306. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.3.w26024vvw6541gv7.
Trusty, J.; Mellin, E. A.; Herbert, J. T. (2008). "Closing achievement gaps: Roles and tasks of elementary school counselors". Elementary School Journal. 108 (5): 407–421. doi:10.1086/589470.
Tucker, C.; Dixon, A.; Griddine, K. (2010). "Academically successful African American male urban high school students' experiencing of mattering to others at school". Professional School Counseling. 14 (2): 135–145. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.2.k215671rj018g134.
Villalba, J. A.; Akos, P.; Keeter, K.; Ames, A. (2007). "Promoting Latino student achievement and development through the ASCA National Model". Professional School Counseling. 12: 272–279.
Webb, L. D.; Brigman, G. A. (2006). "Student success skills: Tools and strategies for improved academic and social outcomes". Professional School Counseling. 10 (2): 112–120. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.2.9612807w81q8v374.
Weinbaum, A. T., Allen, D., Blythe, T., Simon, K., Seidel, S., & Rubin, C. (2004). Teaching as inquiry: Asking hard questions to improve student achievement. New York: Teachers College Press.
West-Olatunji, C.; Shure, L; Pringle, R.; Adams, T.; Lewis, D.; Cholewa, B. (2010). "Exploring how school counselors position low-income African American girls as mathematics and science learners". Professional School Counseling. 13 (3): 184–195. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.184.


==== Accountability; evidence- and data-based school counseling program curricula, evaluation, and practices ====
Astramovich, R. L., Hoskins, W. J., & Coker, J. K. (2008). The Accountability Bridge: A model for evaluating school counseling programs. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt.
Brigman, G., Lemberger, M., & Moor, M. (2012).  Striving to evince educational excellence: Measures for Adlerian counselors to demonstrate impact on student achievement and behavior.  Journal of Individual Psychology.
Brigman, G., Villares, E., & Webb, L. (2013). The efficacy of individual psychology approaches for improving student achievement and behavior. Journal of Individual Psychology.
Brigman, G.; Webb, L. (2008). "Education: An Individual Psychology approach to school consultation". Journal of Individual Psychology. 64: 506–515.
Camizzi, E.; Clark, M. A.; Yacco, S.; Goodman, W. (2009). "Becoming "difference makers": School-university collaboration to create, implement, and evaluate data-driven counseling interventions". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 471–479. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.471.
Carey, J.; Dimmitt, C. (2012). "School counseling and student outcomes: Summary of six statewide studies". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 146–153. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.146.
Carey, J. C.; Dimmitt, C.; Hatch, T. A.; Lapan, R. T.; Whiston, S. C. (2008). "Report of the national panel for evidence-based school counseling: Outcome research coding protocol and evaluation of student success skills and second step". Professional School Counseling. 11 (3): 197–206. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.197.
Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2007). "The ACCESS Questionnaire: Assessing K-12 school counseling programs and interventions to ensure equity and success for every student". Counseling and Human Development. 39: 1–10.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Dahir, C. A.; Stone, C. B. (2009). "School counselor accountability: The path to social justice and systemic change". Journal of Counseling & Development. 87: 12–20. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2009.tb00544.x.
Dimmitt, C (2009). "Why evaluation matters: Determining effective school counseling practices". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 395–399. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.395.
Dimmitt, C., Carey, J. C., & Hatch, T. (2007). Evidence-based school counseling: Making a difference with data-driven practices. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Gruman, D. H.; Hoelzen, B. (2011). "Determining responsiveness to school counseling interventions using behavioral observations". Professional School Counseling. 14: 183–90. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-14.183.
Hatch, T. (2014). "The use of data in school counseling: Hatching results for students programs, and the profession." Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Hayes, R. L.; Nelson, J.-L.; Tabin, M.; Pearson, G.; Worthy, C. (2002). "Using school-wide data to advocate for student success". Professional School Counseling. 6: 86–95.
Holcomb-McCoy, C.; Gonzalez, I.; Johnston, G. (2009). "School counselor dispositions as predictors of data usage". Professional School Counseling. 12 (5): 343–351. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.343.
Isaacs, M. L. (2003). "Data-driven decision-making: The engine of accountability". Professional School Counseling. 6: 288–295.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Lemberger, M. E.; Brigman, G.; Webb; Moore, M. M. (2013). "Student Success Skills: An evidence-based cognitive and social change theory for student achievement". Journal of Education. 192 (2–3): 89–100. doi:10.1177/0022057412192002-311.
Leon, A.; Villares, E.; Brigman, G.; Webb, L.; Peluso, P. (2011). "Closing the achievement gap of Hispanic students: A school counseling response". Counseling Outcome Research and Evaluation. 2: 73–86. doi:10.1177/2150137811400731.
Mariani, M., Webb, L., Villares, E., & Brigman, G. (2012). Effects of participation in student success skills on pro-social and bullying behavior.
Martin, I.; Carey, J. C. (2012). "Evaluation capacity within state-level school counseling programs: A cross-case analysis". Professional School Counseling. 15 (3): 132–143. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-15.132.
Poynton, T. A. (2009). "Evaluating the effectiveness of a professional development workshop to increase school counselors' use of data: The role of technology". Journal of Counselor Preparation and Supervision. 1: 29–48. doi:10.7729/11.0107.
Poynton, T. A.; Carey, J. C. (2006). "An integrated model of data-based decision making for school counseling". Professional School Counseling. 10 (2): 121–130. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.2.r5616876nt044766.
Scarborough, J. L.; Culbreth, J. R. (2008). "Examining discrepancies between actual and preferred practice of school counselors". Journal of Counseling & Development. 86 (4): 446–459. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2008.tb00533.x.
Scarborough, J. L. (2005). "The school counselor activity rating scale: An instrument for gathering process data". Professional School Counseling. 8: 274–283.
Schellenberg, R.; Grothaus, T. (2009). "Promoting cultural responsiveness and closing the achievement gap with standards blending". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 440–449. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.440.
Schellenberg, R (2007). "Standards blending: Aligning school counseling programs with school academic achievement missions". Virginia Counselors Journal. 29: 13–20.
Sink, C. A. (2009). "School counselors as accountability leaders: Another call for action". Professional School Counseling. 13 (2): 68–74. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.68.
Sink, C. A.; Spencer, L. R. (2005). "My Class Inventory-Short Form as an accountability tool for elementary school counselors to measure classroom climate". Professional School Counseling. 9: 37–48. doi:10.5330/prsc.9.1.y720844684111402.
Stone, C. B., & Dahir, C. A. (2011). School counselor accountability: A MEASURE of student success (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Studer, J. R.; Oberman, A. H.; Womack, R. H. (2006). "Producing evidence to show counseling effectiveness in schools". Professional School Counseling. 9 (4): 385–391. doi:10.5330/prsc.9.4.106k25443020h5g7.
Villares, E., Brigman, G., & Maier, A. (2010). Student Success Skills:  Building quality worlds and advocating for school counseling programs. International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy, 1.
Villares, E.; Brigman, G.; Peluso, P. (2008). "Ready to Learn: An evidence-based Individual Psychology-linked curriculum for prekindergarten through first grade". Journal of Individual Psychology. 64: 386–402.
Villares, E., Frain, M., Brigman, G., Webb, L., & Peluso, P. (2012). The impact of Student Success Skills on standardized test scores: A meta-analysis Counseling Outcome Research and Evaluation,doi 2150137811434041
Villares, E.; Lemberger, M.; Brigman, G. (2011). "Student Success Skills: An evidence-based school counseling program grounded in humanistic theory". Journal of Humanistic Counseling, Education and Development. 50: 1.
Webb, L.; Lemberger, M.; Brigman, G. (2008). "Student Success Skills: A review of a research-based school counselor intervention influenced by Individual Psychology". Journal of Individual Psychology. 64: 339–352.
Whiston, S. C.; Aricak, T. (2008). "Development and initial investigation of the School Counseling Program Evaluation Scale". Professional School Counseling. 11 (4): 253–261. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.253.
Young, A.; Kaffenberger, C. J. (2011). "The beliefs and practices of school counselors who use data to implement comprehensive school counseling programs". Professional School Counseling. 15 (2): 67–76. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-15.67.
Young, A., & Kaffenberger, C. (2009). Making data work (2nd ed.) Alexandria, VA:  American School Counselor Association.


==== Advocacy, empowerment, equity, social justice ====
Akos, P.; Lambie, G. W.; Milsom, A.; Gilbert, K. (2007). "Early adolescents' aspirations and academic tracking: An exploratory investigation". Professional School Counseling. 11: 57–64. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.57.
Bemak, F.; Chung, R. C.-Y. (2005). "Advocacy as a critical role for urban school counselors: Working toward equity and social justice". Professional School Counseling. 8: 196–202.
Bryan, J., Moore-Thomas, C., Day-Vines, N. L., Holcomb-McCoy, C., & Mitchell, N. (2009). Characteristics of students who receive school counseling services: Implications for practice and research. Journal of School Counseling, 7 .
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Clemens, E. V.; Shipp, A.; Kimbel, T. (2011). "Investigating the psychometric properties of School Counselor Self-Advocacy Questionnaire". Professional School Counseling. 15: 34–44. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-15.34.
Cox, A. A., & Lee, C. C. (2007). Challenging educational inequities: School counselors as agents of social justice. In C. C. Lee, (Ed.)., Counseling for social justice, 2nd ed. (pp. 3–14). Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Griffin, D.; Steen, S. (2011). "A social justice approach to school counseling". Journal for Social Action in Counseling and Psychology. 3: 74–85.
Hipolito-Delgado, C. P.; Lee, C. C. (2007). "Empowerment theory for the professional school counselor: A manifesto for what really matters". Professional School Counseling. 10 (4): 327–332. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.4.fm1547261m80x744.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Mason, E. C. M.; Ockerman, M. S.; Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). "Change-Agent-for-Equity (CAFE) model: A framework for school counselor identity" (PDF). Journal of School Counseling. 11: 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-08.
Ockerman, M. S., Mason, E. C. M., & Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). School counseling supervision in challenging times: The CAFE supervisor model. Journal of Counselor Preparation and Supervision, 5(2), Article 4. DOI:10.7729/51.0024 http://repository.wcsu.edu/jcps/vol5/iss2/4/
Ratts, M.; DeKruyf, L.; Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2008). "The ACA Advocacy Competencies: A social justice advocacy framework for professional school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 11 (2): 90–97. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.90.
Singh, A. A.; Urbano, A.; Haston, M.; McMahon, E. (2010). "School counselors' strategies for social justice change: A grounded theory of what works in the real world". Professional School Counseling. 13 (3): 135–145. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.135.
Smith, L.; Davis, K.; Bhowmik, M. (2010). "Youth participatory action research groups as school counseling interventions". Professional School Counseling. 14 (2): 174–182. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.2.m62r11337332gt54.
Studer, J. R. (2005). The professional school counselor: An advocate for students. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.


==== ASCA National Model, school counseling programs, closing gaps ====
Alberta Education, Special Education Branch (1995). From position to program: Building a comprehensive school guidance and counselling program: Planning and resource guide. Edmonton, Alberta, Canada: Author.
American School Counselor Association/Hatch, T. & Bowers, J. (2012). The ASCA National Model: A framework for school counseling programs, (3rd ed.) Alexandria, VA: Author.
Barna, J. S.; Brott, P. E. (2011). "How important is personal-social development to academic achievement? The elementary school counselor's perspective". Professional School Counseling. 14: 242–249. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.3.044367l82131qj00.
Burkhard, A. W.; Gillen, M.; Martinez, M. J.; Skytte, S. (2012). "Implementation challenges and training needs for comprehensive school counseling programs in Wisconsin high schools". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 136–145. doi:10.5330/PSC.n.2012-16.136.
Campbell, C. A., & Dahir, C. A. (1997). Sharing the vision: The national standards for school counseling programs. Alexandria, VA: American School Counselor Association.
Carey, J.; Dimmitt, C. (2012). "School counseling and student outcomes: Summary of six statewide studies". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 146–153. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.146.
Carey, J.; Harrington, K.; Martin, I.; Hoffman, D. (2012). "A statewide evaluation of the outcomes of the implementation of ASCA National Model school counseling programs in rural and suburban Nebraska high schools". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 100–107. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.100.
Carey, J.; Harrington, K.; Martin, I.; Stevenson, D. (2012). "A statewide evaluation of the outcomes of the implementation of ASCA National Model school counseling programs in Utah high schools". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 89–99. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.89.
Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2007). "The ACCESS Questionnaire: Assessing K-12 school counseling programs and interventions to ensure equity and success for every student". Counseling and Human Development. 39: 1–10.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Clemens, E. V.; Carey, J. C.; Harrington, K. M. (2010). "The School Counseling Program Implementation Survey: Initial instrument development and exploratory factor analysis". Professional School Counseling. 14 (2): 125–134. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.2.k811174041n40l11.
Corbin, D. S.; McNaughton, K. (2004). "Perceived needs of educational administrators for student services offices in a Chinese context: School counselling programs addressing the needs of children and teachers". School Psychology International. 25: 373–382. doi:10.1177/0143034304046908.
Dahir, C. A.; Burnham, J. J.; Stone, C. (2009). "Listen to the voices: School counselors and comprehensive school counseling programs". Professional School Counseling. 12 (3): 182–192. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.182.
De Leon, Angela P., 2011. "A Model Prekindergarten through 4th Year of College (P-16) Individual Graduation Plan Proposal." Applied Research Projects, Texas State University-San Marcos. http://ecommons.txstate.edu/arp/364
Dimmitt, C.; Carey, J. (2007). "Using the ASCA National Model to facilitate school transitions". Professional School Counseling. 10 (3): 227–232. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.3.q0g7108523603342.
Dimmit, C.; Wilkerson, B. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling in Rhode Island: Access to services and student outcomes". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 125–135. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.125.
Fezler, B., & Brown, C. (2011). The international model for school counseling programs. Pembroke Pines, FL: Association of American Schools in South America (AASSA).  https://www.aassa.com/uploaded/Educational_Research/US_Department_of_State/Counseling_Standards/International_Counseling_Model_Handbook.pdf
Fitch, T. J.; Marshall, J. L. (2004). "What counselors do in high-achieving schools: A study on the role of the school counselor". Professional School Counseling. 7: 172–177.
Hartline, J.; Cobia, D. (2012). "School counselors: Closing achievement gaps and writing results reports". Professional School Counseling. 16: 71–79. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.71.
Hatch, T. (2008). Professional challenges in school counseling: Organizational, institutional and political. Journal of School Counseling, 6(22). Retrieved from http://www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/v6n22.pdf.
Hatch, T. (2014). The use of data in school counseling: Hatching results for students, programs and the professions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Hatch, T., & Bowers, J. (2003, 2005, 2012). The ASCA National Model: A framework for school counseling programs. Alexandria, VA: American School Counselor Association.
Hatch, T.; Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2008). "School counselor beliefs about ASCA National Model school counseling program components using the SCPCS". Professional School Counseling. 12: 34–42. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.34.
Holcomb-McCoy, C.; Mitchell, N. (2005). "A descriptive study of urban school counseling programs". Professional School Counseling. 8: 203–209.
Johnson, S.; Johnson, C. D. (2003). "Results-based guidance: A systems approach to student support programs". Professional School Counseling. 6: 180–185.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Carey, J.; Harrington, K.; Martin, I.; Stevenson, D. (2012). "A statewide evaluation of the outcomes of the implementation of ASCA National Model school counseling programs in Utah high schools". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 89–99. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.89.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Lapan, R. T. (2001). Results-based comprehensive guidance and counseling programs: A framework for planning and evaluation. Professional School Counseling, 4 .
Lapan, R. T.; Gysbers, N. C.; Petroski, G. F. (2001). "Helping seventh graders be safe and successful in school: A statewide study of comprehensive guidance and counseling programs". Journal of Counseling and Development. 79: 320–330. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.2001.tb01977.x.
Lapan, R. T.; Gysbers, N. C.; Sun, Y. (1997). "The impact of more fully implemented guidance programs on the school experiences of high school students: A statewide evaluation study". Journal of Counseling and Development. 75 (4): 292–302. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.1997.tb02344.x.
Lee, V. V., & Goodnough, G. E. (2011). Systemic, data-driven school counseling practice and programming for equity. In B. T. Erford, (Ed.)., "Transforming the school counseling profession." (pp. 129–153). Boston: Pearson.
MacDonald, G.; Sink, C. A. (1999). "A qualitative developmental analysis of comprehensive guidance program in schools in the United States". British Journal of Guidance and Counselling. 27 (3): 415–430. doi:10.1080/03069889908256281.
Martin, I.; Carey, J. C. (2012). "Evaluation capacity within state-level school counseling programs: A cross-case analysis". Professional School Counseling. 15 (3): 132–143. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-15.132.
Martin, I.; Carey, J.; DeCoster, K. (2009). "A national study of the current status of state school counseling models". Professional School Counseling. 12 (5): 378–386. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.378.
Mason, E. C. M.; Ockerman, M. S.; Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). "Change-Agent-for-Equity (CAFE) model: A framework for school counselor identity" (PDF). Journal of School Counseling. 11: 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-08.
Nova Scotia Department of Education. (2002). Comprehensive guidance and counselling program. Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada: Author.
Paisley, P. O. (2001). "Maintaining and enhancing the developmental focus in school counseling programs". Professional School Counseling. 4: 271–277.
Perusse, R.; Goodnough, G. D. (2001). "A comparison of existing school counselor program content with the Education Trust initiatives". Counselor Education and Supervision. 41 (2): 100–110. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2001.tb01274.x.
Perusse, R.; Goodnough, G. E.; Noel, C. J. (2001). "Use of the national standards for school counseling programs in preparing school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 5: 49–56.
Poynton, T. A.; Schumacher, R. A.; Wilczenski, F. L. (2008). "School counselors' attitudes regarding statewide comprehensive developmental guidance model implementation". Professional School Counseling. 11 (6): 417–422. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.417.
Pyne, J. R. (2011). "Comprehensive school counseling programs, job satisfaction, and the ASCA National Model". Professional School Counseling. 15 (2): 88–97. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-15.88.
Schellenberg, R.; Grothaus, T. (2009). "Promoting cultural responsiveness and closing the achievement gap with standards blending". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 440–449. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.440.
Schellenberg, R (2007). "Standards blending: Aligning school counseling programs with school academic achievement missions". Virginia Counselors Journal. 29: 13–20.
Schwallie-Giddis, P., ter Maat, M., & Pak, M. (2003). Initiating leadership by introducing and implementing the ASCA National Model. Professional School Counseling, 6  170-17 .
Sink, C. A.; Stroh, H. R. (2003). "Raising achievement test scores of early elementary school students through comprehensive school counseling programs". Professional School Counseling. 6: 352–364.
Sink, C. A.; Akos, P.; Turnbull, R. J.; Mvududu, N. (2008). "An investigation of comprehensive school counseling programs and academic achievement in Washington State middle schools". Professional School Counseling. 12: 43–53. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.43.
Stevens, H.; Wilkerson, K. (2010). "The developmental assets and ASCA's National Standards: A crosswalk review". Professional School Counseling. 13 (4): 227–233. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.227.
Villalba, José; Akos, Patrick; Keeter, Kara; Ames, Abigail (2007). "Promoting Latino student achievement and development through the ASCA National Model". Professional School Counseling. 10 (5): 464–474. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.5.85801n6007711610.
Walsh, M. E.; Barrett, J. G.; DePaul, J. (2007). "Day-to-day activities of school counselors: Alignment with new directions in the field and the ASCA National Model". Professional School Counseling. 10 (4): 370–378. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.4.47p342040286mw72.
Young, A.; Kaffenberger, C. J. (2011). "The beliefs and practices of school counselors who use data to implement comprehensive school counseling programs". Professional School Counseling. 15 (2): 67–76. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-15.67.


==== Bilingual school counseling ====
Aydin, G.; Bryan, J.; Duys, D. K. (2012). "School counselors' partnerships working with linguistically diverse families: An exploratory study". The School Community Journal. 22: 145–166.
Bruhn, R. A., Irby, B. J., Lou, M., Thweatt, W. T. III, & Lara-Alecio, R. (2005). A model for training bilingual school counselors. In J. Tinajero and V. Gonzales (Eds.), Review of research and practice, (pp. 145–161). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Seo, M.; Sink, C. A.; Cho, H.-I. (2011). "Korean version of the Life Perspectives Inventory: Psychometric properties and implications for high school counseling". Professional School Counseling. 15: 15–33. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-15.15.
Shi, Q.; Steen, S. (2012). "Using the Achieving Success Everyday (ASE) Group Model to promote self-esteem and academic achievement for English as a Second Language (ESL) students". Professional School Counseling. 16: 63–70. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.63.
Smith-Adcock, S.; Daniels, M. H.; Lee, S. M.; Villalba, J. A.; Indelicato, N. A. (2006). "Culturally responsive school counseling for Hispanic/Latino students and families: The need for bilingual school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 10: 92–101. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.1.8r04h7727651174m.


==== Career and college access/admission/readiness; closing opportunity/attainment gaps ====
Auerbach, S (2002). "Why do they give the good classes to some and not to others? Latino parent narratives of struggle in a college access program". Teachers College Record. 104 (7): 1369–1392. doi:10.1111/1467-9620.00207.
Bryan, J.; Holcomb-McCoy, C.; Moore-Thomas, C; Day-Vines, N. L. (2009). "Who sees the school counselor for college information? A national study". Professional School Counseling. 12 (4): 280–291. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.280.
Bryan, J.; Moore-Thomas, C.; Day-Vines, N. L.; Holcomb-McCoy, C. (2011). "School counselors as social capital: The effects of high school college counseling on college application rates". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89 (2): 190–199. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00077.x.
Ceja, M (2004). "Chicana college aspirations and the role of parents: Developing educational resilience". Journal of Hispanic Higher Education. 3 (4): 338–362. doi:10.1177/1538192704268428.
Chang, D. H. F. (2002). "The past, present, and future of career counseling in Taiwan". Career Development Quarterly. 50 (3): 218–225. doi:10.1002/j.2161-0045.2002.tb00897.x.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Saud Maxwell, K., & Bailey, D. F. (2009). Equity-based school counseling: Ensuring career and college readiness for every student.  DVD. Hanover, MA:  Microtraining Associates.
The College Board. (2008). Inspiration & innovation: Ten effective counseling practices from the College Board's Inspiration Award schools. Washington, D.C.: Author.
The College Board. (2010). The college counseling sourcebook: Advice and strategies from experienced school counselors. (7th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Collins, D. E.; Weinbaum, A. T.; Ramon, G.; Vaughan, D. (2009). "Laying the groundwork: The constant gardening for postsecondary access and success". Journal of Hispanic Higher Education. 8: 394–417. doi:10.1177/1538192709347848.
De Leon, Angela P., 2011. A Model Prekindergarten Through 4th Year of College (P-16) Individual Graduation Plan Proposal. Applied Research Projects, Texas State University-San Marcos. http://ecommons.txstate.edu/arp/364
Fallon, M. A. C. (2011). Enrollment management's sleeping giant: The net price calculator mandate. Journal of College Admissions, Spring, 6-13.
Fitzpatrick, C., & Costantini, K. (2011). Counseling 21st Century students for optimal college and career readiness: A 9th-12th grade curriculum. New York, NY: Routledge.
Gibbons, M. M.; Borders, L. D.; Wiles, M. E.; Stephan, J. B.; Davis, P. E. (2006). "Career and college planning needs of ninth graders—as reported by ninth graders". Professional School Counseling. 10 (2): 168–178. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.2.vj457656056x55w7.
Gibbons, M. M.; Borders, L. D. (2010). "A measure of college-going self-efficacy for middle school students" (PDF). Professional School Counseling. 13 (4): 234–243. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.234.
Hatch, T., & Bardwell, R. (2012). School counselors using data. In National Association for College Admission Counseling (Ed.), NACAC's Fundamentals of College Admission Counseling (3rd ed.). Arlington, VA: Counseling.
Hatch, T. (2012). School counselors: Creating a college-going culture in K-12 schools. In National Association for College Admission Counseling (Ed.), NACAC's Fundamentals of College Admission Counseling (3rd ed.). Arlington, VA: National Association for College Admission Counseling.
Horn, L., & Berktold, J. (1999). Students with disabilities in postsecondary education: A profile of preparation, participation, and outcomes. (National Center for Education Statistics No. 187). Washington, D. C.: United States Department of Education.
Hossler, D., Schmidt, J., & Vesper, N. (1998). Going to college: How social, economic, and educational factors influence the decisions students make. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Krell, M.; Perusse, R. (2012). "Providing college readiness counseling for students with Autism spectrum disorders: A Delphi study to guide school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 16: 29–39. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.29.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Lapan, R. T.; Whitcomb, S. A.; Aleman, N. M. (2012). "Connecticut professional school counselors: College and career counseling services and smaller ratios benefit students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 117–124. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.124.
Lee, S. M.; Daniels, M. H.; Puig, A.; Newgent, R. A.; Nam, S. K. (2008). "A data-based model to predict postsecondary educational attainment of low-socioeconomic-status students". Professional School Counseling. 11 (5): 306–316. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.306.
Marisco, M.; Getch, Y. Q. (2009). "Transitioning Hispanic seniors from high school to college". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 458–462. doi:10.5330/PSC.n.2010-12.458.
Mason, E. C. M.; Ockerman, M. S.; Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). "Change-Agent-for-Equity (CAFE) model: A framework for school counselor identity" (PDF). Journal of School Counseling. 11: 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-08.
McKillip, M. E. M.; Rawls, A.; Barry, C. (2012). "Improving college access: A review of research on the role of high school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 16: 49–58. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.49.
Muhammad, C. G. (2008). "African American student and college choice: A consideration of the role of school counselors". NASSP Bulletin. 92: 81–94. doi:10.1177/0192636508320989.
National Association of College Admission Counseling. (2008). Fundamentals of college admission counseling (2d ed.). Dubuque, IA: Kendall-Hunt.
Ohrt, J. H.; Lambie, G. W.; Ieva, K. P. (2009). "Supporting Latino and African-American students in Advanced Placement courses: A school counseling program's approach". Professional School Counseling. 13: 59–63. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.59.
Oliva, M (2004). "Reluctant partners, problem definition, and legislative intent: P-20 policy for Latino college success". Journal of Hispanic Higher Education. 3 (2): 209–230. doi:10.1177/1538192704263574.
Perna, L.; Rowan-Kenyon, H.; Thomas, S.; Bell, A.; Anderson, R.; Li, C. (2008). "The role of college counseling in shaping college opportunity: Variations across high schools". Review of Higher Education. 31 (2): 131–159. doi:10.1353/rhe.2007.0073.
Perna, L; Titus, M. A. (2005). "The relationship between parental involvement as social capital and college enrollment: An examination of racial/ethnic group differences". Journal of Higher Education. 76 (5): 485–518. doi:10.1353/jhe.2005.0036.
Sciarra, D. T.; Ambrosino, K. E. (2011). "Post-secondary expectations and educational attainment". Professional School Counseling. 14: 231–241. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-14.231.
Sciarra, D. T.; Whitson, M. L. (2007). "Predictive factors in postsecondary educational attainment among Latinos". Professional School Counseling. 10 (3): 307–316. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.3.e354r3u2572t5401.
Smith, W. L.; Zhang, P. (2009). "Students' perceptions and experiences with key factors during the transition from high school to college". College Student Journal. 43: 643–657.
Stage, F.; Hossler, D. (1989). "Differences in family influences on college attendance plans for male and female ninth graders". Research in Higher Education. 30 (3): 301–314. doi:10.1007/bf00992606.
Tang, M.; Pan, W.; Newmeyer, M. (2008). "Factors influencing high school students' career aspirations". Professional School Counseling. 11 (5): 285–295. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.285.
Torrez, N (2004). "Developing parent information frameworks that support college preparation for Latino students". The High School Journal. 87 (3): 54–59. doi:10.1353/hsj.2004.0006.
Trusty, J.; Niles, S. G. (2004). "Realized potential or lost talent: High school variables and bachelor's degree completion". Career Development Quarterly. 53: 2–15. doi:10.1002/j.2161-0045.2004.tb00651.x.
Trusty, J.; Niles, S. G. (2003). "High-school math courses and completion of the bachelor's degree". Professional School Counseling. 7: 99–107.
Turner, S. L.; Ziebell, J. L. C. (2011). "The career beliefs of inner-city adolescents". Professional School Counseling. 15: 1–14. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-15.1.


==== Caseloads, collaboration, resources, schedule changes, school counselor/student ratios ====
Akos, P.; Schuldt, H.; Walendin, M. (2009). "School counselor assignment in secondary schools". Professional School Counseling. 13: 23–29. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.23.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Griffin, D.; Farris, A. (2010). "School counselors and collaboration: Finding resources through community asset mapping". Professional School Counseling. 13 (5): 248–256. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.248.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Lapan, R. T.; Gysbers, N. C.; Bragg, S.; Pierce, M. E. (2012). "Missouri professional school counselors: Ratios matter, especially in high-poverty schools". Professional School Counseling. 16: 117–124. doi:10.5330/PSC.n.2012-16.124.
Lapan, R. T.; Whitcomb, S. A.; Aleman, N. M. (2012). "Connecticut professional school counselors: College and career counseling services and smaller ratios benefit students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 117–124. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.124.
McCarthy, C.; Kerne, V. V. H.; Calfa, N. A.; Lambert, R. G.; Guzman, M. (2010). "An exploration of school counselors' demands and resources: Relationship to stress, biographic, and caseload characteristics". Professional School Counseling. 13 (3): 146–158. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.146.
Portman, T.; Wood, S. M.; Viviani, A. (2011). "Secondary student schedule changes: Accountability issues in school counseling program management". Journal of Counseling Research and Practice. 2: 20–25.


==== Counseling theories in schools ====
Henderson, D. A. & Thompson, C. L. (2010). Counseling children. New York: Brooks/Cole/Cengage.
Lemberger, M. E.; Nash, E. R. (2008). "School counselors and the influence of Adler: Individual psychology since the advent of the ASCA National Model". Journal of Individual Psychology. 64: 386–402.
Lemberger, M. E. (2010). "Advocating student-within-environment: A humanistic theory for school counseling". The Journal of Humanistic Counseling, Education and Development. 49 (2): 131–146. doi:10.1002/j.2161-1939.2010.tb00093.x.
Perusse, R., and Goodnough, G. E., (Eds.). (2004). Leadership, advocacy, and direct service strategies for professional school counselors. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole/Cengage.
Shen, Y.; Herr, E. L. (2003). "Perceptions of play therapy in Taiwan: The voices of school counselors and school counselor educators". International Journal for the Advancement of Counseling. 25: 27–41. doi:10.1023/A:1024924111194.
Sklare, G. B. (2014). Brief counseling that works: A solution-focused therapy approach for school counselors and other mental health professionals (3rd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Winslade, J. M., & Monk G. D. (2007). Narrative counseling in schools: Powerful and brief (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.


==== Credentialing exams for school counselors ====
Schellenberg, R. (2012). The school counselor’s study guide for credentialing exams. New York: Routledge.


==== Cultural competence, ethnic/racial identity development in schools ====
Buser, J. K. (2010). "American Indian adolescents and disordered eating". Professional School Counseling. 14 (2): 146–155. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.2.k8v1wu5nj23x1492.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Day-Vines, N. L.; Day-Hairston, B. O. (2005). "Culturally congruent strategies for addressing the behavioral needs of urban African-American male adolescents". Professional School Counseling. 8: 236–243.
Day-Vines, N.; Patton, J.; Baytops, J. (2003). "African American adolescents: The impact of race and middle class status on the counseling process". Professional School Counseling. 7: 40–51.
Holcomb-McCoy, C. & Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2011). Culturally competent school counselors: Affirming diversity by challenging oppression. In B. T. Erford, (Ed). Transforming the school counseling profession. (3rd ed). (pp. 90–109). Boston: Pearson.
Malott, K. M.; Alessandria, K. P.; Kirkpatrick, M.; Carandang, J. (2009). "Ethnic labeling in Mexican-origin youth: A qualitative assessment". Professional School Counseling. 12 (5): 352–364. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.352.
Maxwell, M. J.; Henriksen, R. C. (2012). "Counseling multiple heritage adolescents: A phenomenological study of experiences and practices of middle school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 16: 18–28. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.18.
Portman, T. A. A. (2009). "Faces of the future: School counselors as cultural mediators". Journal of Counseling & Development. 87: 21–27. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2009.tb00545.x.
Schellenberg, R.; Grothaus, T. (2009). "Promoting cultural responsiveness and closing the achievement gap with standards blending". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 440–449. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.440.
Shen, Y.-J.; Lowing, R. J. (2007). "School counselors' self-perceived Asian American counseling competence". Professional School Counseling. 11: 69–71. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.69.
Shin, R. Q.; Daly, B. P.; Vera, E. M. (2007). "The relationships of peer norms, ethnic identity, and peer support to school engagement in urban youth". Professional School Counseling. 10 (4): 379–388. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.4.l0157553k063x29u.
Suh, S.; Satcher, J. (2005). "Understanding at-risk Korean American youth". Professional School Counseling. 8: 428–435.
Trusty, J (2002). "African Americans' educational expectations: Longitudinal causal models for women and men". Journal of Counseling & Development. 80 (3): 332–345. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2002.tb00198.x.
Turner, S. L.; Conkel, J. L.; Reich, A. N.; Trotter, M. J.; Slewart, J. J. (2006). "Social skills efficacy and proactivity among Native American adolescents". Professional School Counseling. 10 (2): 189–194. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.2.w26uw470745v0815.
Vera, E. M.; Vacek, K.; Coyle, L. D.; Stinson, J.; Mull, M.; Buchheit, C.; Gorman, C.; Hewitt, A.; Keene, C.; Blackmon, S.; Langrehr, K. J. (2011). "An examination of culturally relevant stressors, coping, ethnic identity, and subjective well-being in urban ethnic minority adolescents". Professional School Counseling. 15 (2): 55–66. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-15.55.
Wyatt, S (2009). "The brotherhood: Empowering adolescent African-American males toward excellence". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 463–470. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.463.


==== Counseling core curriculum, lesson plans, classroom management ====
Fitzpatrick, C., & Costantini, K. (2011). Counseling 21st Century students for optimal college and career readiness: A 9th-12th grade curriculum. New York, NY: Routledge.
Geltner, J. A.; Clark, M. A. (2005). "Engaging students in classroom guidance: Management strategies for middle school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 9 (2): 164–166. doi:10.5330/prsc.9.2.ep275j6064637461.
Geltner, J. A.; Cunningham, T. J.; Caldwell, C. D. (2011). "Identifying curriculum components for classroom management training for school counselors: A Delphi study". Journal of Counselor Preparation and Supervision. 3: 82–94.
Goodnough, G. E., Perusse, R., & Erford, B. T. (2011). Developmental classroom guidance. In B. T. Erford, (Ed.)., Transforming the school counseling profession (3rd ed.). (pp. 154–177). Boston: Pearson.
Perusse, R., & Goodnough, G. E., (Eds.). (2004). Leadership, advocacy, and direct service strategies for professional school counselors. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Villares, E., Brigman, G., & Maier, A. (2010). Student Success Skills:  Building quality worlds and advocating for school counseling programs. International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy, 1.
Villares, E.; Brigman, G.; Peluso, P. (2008). "Ready to Learn: An evidence-based Individual Psychology-linked curriculum for prekindergarten through first grade". Journal of Individual Psychology. 64: 386–402.
Villares, E., Frain, M., Brigman, G., Webb, L., & Peluso, P. (2012). The impact of Student Success Skills on standardized test scores: A meta-analysis Counseling Outcome Research and Evaluation,doi 2150137811434041
Villares, E.; Lemberger, M.; Brigman, G. (2011). "Student Success Skills: An evidence-based school counseling program grounded in humanistic theory". Journal of Humanistic Counseling, Education and Development. 50: 1.
Webb, L.; Lemberger, M.; Brigman, G. (2008). "Student Success Skills: A review of a research-based school counselor intervention influenced by Individual Psychology". Journal of Individual Psychology. 64: 339–352.


==== Ethics and law in school counseling ====
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Moyer, M. S.; Sullivan, J. R.; Growcock, D. (2012). "When is it ethical to inform administrators about student risk-taking behaviors? Perceptions of school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 15 (3): 98–109. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-15.98.
Moyer, M. S.; Sullivan, J. R. (2008). "Student risk-taking behaviors: When do school counselors break confidentiality?". Professional School Counseling. 11 (4): 236–245. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.236.
Stone, C. B.; Zirkel, P. A. (2010). "School counselor advocacy: When law and ethics may collide". Professional School Counseling. 13 (4): 244–247. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.244.
Stone, C. B. (2005). School counseling principles: Ethics and law. Alexandria, VA:  American School Counselor Association.


==== Gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender school counseling ====
Bidell, M. P. (2005). "The Sexual Orientation Counselor Competency Scale: Assessing attitudes, skills, and knowledge of counselors working with lesbian/gay/bisexual clients". Counselor Education and Supervision. 44: 267–279. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2005.tb01755.x.
Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2012). Counseling and advocacy with a gay father, a straight mom, and a transgender adolescent. In S. H. Dworkin & M. Pope, (Eds.)., Casebook for counseling lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender persons and their families (pp. 45–52). Alexandria, VA:  American Counseling Association.
Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2001). "Counseling and advocacy with transgendered and gender-variant persons in schools and families". Journal of Humanistic Counseling, Education and Development. 40: 34–48. doi:10.1002/j.2164-490x.2001.tb00100.x.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., & Haley-Banez, L. (2000). Lesbian, bisexual, gay, and transgendered counseling in schools and families (1, 2). DVDs. Hanover, MA: Microtraining Associates.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Depaul, J.; Walsh, M.; Dam, U. C. (2009). "The role of school counselors in addressing sexual orientation in schools". Professional School Counseling. 12 (4): 300–308. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.300.
Fisher, E. S., & Komosa-Hawkins, K., (Eds.). (2013). Creating safe and supportive learning environments: A guide for working with lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning youth and families. New York: Routledge.
Goodrich, K. M.; Luke, M. (2011). "The LGBTQ Responsive Model for Group Supervision of Group Work. Journal". For Specialists in Group Work. 36 (1): 22–39. doi:10.1080/01933922.2010.537739.
Goodrich, K. M.; Luke, M. (2010). "The experiences of school counselors-in-training in group work with LGBTQ adolescents". Journal for Specialists in Group Work. 35 (2): 143–159. doi:10.1080/01933921003705966.
Goodrich, K. M.; Luke, M. (2009). "LGBTQ responsive school counseling". Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling. 3 (2): 113–127. doi:10.1080/15538600903005284.
Luke, M.; Goodrich, K. M.; Scarborough, J. L. (2011). "Integration of K-12 LGBTQI student population into school counselor education curricula: The current state of affairs". The Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling. 5 (2): 80–101. doi:10.1080/15538605.2011.574530.
McFarland, W. P. (2001). "The legal duty to protect gay and lesbian students from violence in school". Professional School Counseling. 4: 171–179.
Ryan, C., & Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). Educating and empowering families of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning students. In E. S. Fisher & K. Komosa-Hawkins, (Eds.)., Creating safe and supportive learning environments: A guide for working with lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning youth and families (pp. 209–229). New York: Routledge.
Satcher, J.; Leggett, M. (2007). "Homonegativity among professional school counselors: An exploratory study". Professional School Counseling. 11: 10–16. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.10.
Satcher, J.; Leggett, M. (2005). "What to say when your student may be gay? A primer for school counselors". Alabama Counseling Association Journal. 31: 44–52.
Smith, S. D., & Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2004). Leadership and advocacy strategies for lesbian, bisexual, gay, transgendered, and questioning (LBGTQ) students: Academic, career, and interpersonal success. In R. Perusse and G. E. Goodnough (Eds.), Leadership, advocacy, and direct service strategies for professional school counselors (pp. 187–221). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole/Cengage.
Varjas, K.; Graybill, E.; Mahan, W.; Dew, B.; Marshall, M.; Singh, A. (2007). "Urban service providers' perspectives on school responses to gay, lesbian, and questioning students: An exploratory study". Professional School Counseling. 11 (2): 113–119. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.113.
Whitman, J. S.; Horn, S. S.; Boyd, C. J. (2007). "Activism in the schools: Providing LGBTQ affirmative training to school counselors". Journal of Gay & Lesbian Mental Health. 11 (3): 143–154. doi:10.1080/19359705.2007.9962487.


==== Group counseling in schools ====
Brigman, G., & Early, B. (2001). Group counseling for school counselors: A practical guide. Portland, ME: Walch.
Paisley, P.; Milsom, A. (2007). "Group work as an essential contribution to transforming school counseling". Journal for Specialists in Group Work. 32: 9–17. doi:10.1080/01933920600977465.
Steen, S.; Bauman, S.; Smith, J. (2007). "Professional school counselors and the practice of group work". Professional School Counseling. 11 (2): 72–80. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.72.
Steen, S.; Kaffenberger, C. J. (2007). "Integrating academic interventions into small group counseling in elementary school". Professional School Counseling. 10 (5): 516–519. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.5.u4023v1n8402337v.


==== International school counseling ====
Aluede, O. O., Adomeh, I. O. C., & Afen-Akpaida, J. E. (2004). Some thoughts about the future of guidance and counseling in Nigeria. Education Winter, 2004.
Ayyash-Abdo, H.; Alamuddin, R.; Mukallid, S. (2010). "School counseling in Lebanon: Past, present, and future". Journal of Counseling & Development. 88: 13–17. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2010.tb00143.x.
Carson, D. K.; Jain, S.; Ramirez, S. (2009). "Counseling and family therapy in India: Evolving professions in a rapidly developing nation". International Journal for the Advancement of Counseling. 31: 45–56. doi:10.1007/s10447-008-9067-8.
Dogan, S (2002). "The historical development of counseling in Turkey". International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling. 22: 57–67. doi:10.1023/A:1005474126819.
Erhard, R., & Harel, Y. (2005). International Journal for the Advancement of Counseling, 27  87-98.
Harris, B. (2013). International school-based counselling scoping report. https://www.bacp.co.uk/media/2050/counselling-minded-international-school-based-counselling-harris.pdf
Hosenshil, T. H., Amundson, N. E., & Niles, S. G. (2013). Counseling around the world: An international handbook. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Hui, E. K. P. (2000). "Guidance as a whole school approach in Hong Kong: From remediation to student development". International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling. 22: 69–82. doi:10.1023/A:1005494502922.
Fezler, B., & Brown, C. (2011). The international model for school counseling programs. Pembroke Pines, FL: Association of American Schools in South America (AASSA).  https://www.aassa.com/uploaded/Educational_Research/US_Department_of_State/Counseling_Standards/International_Counseling_Model_Handbook.pdf
Iwuama, B. C. (1998). "School counseling in Nigeria: Today and tomorrow". Journal of Educational Systems Research and Development. 1: 8–18.
Jiang, G. R. (2007). The development of school counseling in the Chinese mainland. Journal of Basic Education, 14" 65-82.
Lee, S. M., Oh, I., & Suh, S. (2007). Comparison study of Korean andAmerican school counseling for developing a Korean school counseling model. Korean Journal of Counseling Psychology, 19, 539-567.

Lim, S.-L.; Lim, B. K. H.; Michael, R.; Cai, R.; Schock, C. K. (2010). "The trajectory of counseling in China: Past, present, and future trends". Journal of Counseling & Development. 88: 4–8. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2010.tb00141.x.
Maree, J. G.; van der Westhuizen, C. N. (2011). "Professional counseling in South Africa: A landscape under construction". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89: 105–111. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00066.x. hdl:2263/16497.
See, C. M.; Ng, K-M. (2010). "Counseling in Malaysia: History, current status, and future trends". Journal of Counseling & Development. 88: 18–22. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2010.tb00144.x.
Sinha, V. K. (2006). "Counseling in schools". Indian Journal of Social Psychiatry. 22: 82–83.
Stockton, R.; Guneri, O. Y. (2011). "Counseling in Turkey: An evolving field". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89: 98–104. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00065.x.
Stockton, R.; Nitza, A.; Bhusumane, D.-B. (2010). "The development of professional counseling in Botswana". Journal of Counseling & Development. 88: 9–12. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2010.tb00142.x.
Szilagyi, S.; Paredes, D. M. (2010). "Professional counseling in Romania: An introduction". Journal of Counseling & Development. 88: 23–27. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2010.tb00145.x.
Thomason, T. C., & Qiong, X. (2007). School counseling in China Today. Journal of School Counseling, Downloaded from  [2] June 19, 2009.


==== Leadership, systemic change, principal perceptions of school counseling ====
Amatea, E.; Clark, M. (2005). "Changing schools, changing counselors: A qualitative study of school administrators' conceptions of the school counselor role". Professional School Counseling. 9: 16–27. doi:10.5330/prsc.9.1.w6357vn62n5328vp.
Beesley, D.; Frey, L. L. (2001). "Principals' perceptions of school counselor roles and satisfaction with school counseling services". Journal of School Counseling. 4: 1–27.
Bemak, F (2000). "Transforming the role of the counselor to provide leadership in educational reform through collaboration". Professional School Counseling. 3: 323–331.
Chata, C. C.; Loesch, L. C. (2007). "Future school principals' views of the role of professional school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 11: 35–41. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.35.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Miller, E. M., Bailey, D. F., Getch, Y. Q., & Erford, B. T. (2011). Leadership and achievement advocacy for every student. In B. T. Erford, (Ed)., Transforming the school counseling profession (3rd ed.) (pp. 110–128). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Clark, M.; Stone, C. (2001). "School counselors and principals: Partners in support of academic achievement". National Association of Secondary Principals Bulletin. 85: 46–53.
Clemens, E. V.; Milsom, A.; Cashwell, C. S. (2009). "Using leader-member exchange theory to examine principal-school counselor relationships, school counselors' roles, job satisfaction and turnover intentions" (PDF). Professional School Counseling. 13 (2): 75–85. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.75.
Curry, J. R.; Bickmore, D. (2012). "School counselor induction and the importance of mattering". Professional School Counseling. 15 (3): 110–122. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-15.110.
Curry, J. R.; DeVoss, J. A. (2009). "Introduction to special issue: The school counselor as leader". Professional School Counseling. 13 (2): 64–67. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.64.
Dahir, C (2004). "Supporting a nation of learners: The role of school counseling in educational reform". Journal of Counseling and Development. 82 (3): 344–364. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2004.tb00320.x.
Devoss, J. A., & Andrews, M. F. (2006). School counselors as educational leaders. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin.
Dollarhide, C. T.; Gibson, D. M.; Saginak, K. A. (2008). "New counselors' leadership efforts in school counseling: Themes from a year-long qualitative study". Professional School Counseling. 11 (4): 262–271. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.262.
Dollarhide, C. T.; Smith, A. T.; Lemberger, M. E. (2007). "Critical incidents in the development of supportive principals: Facilitating school counselor-principal relationships". Professional School Counseling. 10 (4): 360–369. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.4.k111116677917913.
Dodson, T (2009). "Advocacy and impact: A comparison of administrators' perceptions of the high school counselor role". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 480–487. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.480.
Ford, A.; Nelson, J. (2007). "Secondary school counselors as educational leaders: Shifting perceptions of leadership". Journal of School Counseling. 5: 1–27.
Gysbers, N. C. (2006). "Improving school guidance and counseling practices through effective and sustained state leadership: A response to Miller". Professional School Counseling. 9: 245–247. doi:10.5330/prsc.9.3.004x155281785588.
Hatch, T (2008). "Professional challenges in school counseling: Organizational, institutional and political" (PDF). Journal of School Counseling. 6 (22).
Herr, E. L. (2001). "The impact of national policies, economics, and school reform on comprehensive guidance programs". Professional School Counseling. 4: 236–245.
Janson, C (2009). "High school counselors' views of their leadership behaviors: A Q methodology study". Professional School Counseling. 13 (2): 86–97. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.86.
Janson, C.; Militello, M.; Kosine, N. (2008). "Four views of the professional school counselor and principal relationship: A Q methodology study". Professional School Counseling. 11 (6): 353–361. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.353.
Janson, C.; Stone, C.; Clark, M. A. (2009). "Stretching leadership: A distributed perspective for school counselor leaders". Professional School Counseling. 13 (2): 98–106. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.98.
Johnson, J., Rochkind, J., Ott, A., & DuPont, S. (2010). Can I get a little advice here? How an overstretched high school guidance system is undermining students' college aspirations. San Francisco: Public Agenda.
Kaplan, L. S. (1999). "Hiring the best school counseling candidates to promote student achievement". NASSP Bulletin. 83 (603): 34–39. doi:10.1177/019263659908360306.
Keys, S. G.; Lockhart, E. (2000). "The school counselor's role in facilitating multisystemic change". Professional School Counseling. 3: 101–107.
Kirchner, G.; Setchfield, M. (2005). "School counselors' and school principals' perceptions of the school counselor's role". Education. 126: 10–16.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Leuwerke, W. C.; Walker, J.; Shi, Q. (2009). "Informing principals: The impact of different types of information on principals' perceptions of professional school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 12 (4): 263–271. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.263.
Mason, E. C. M.; McMahon, H. G. (2009). "Leadership practices of school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 13 (2): 107–115. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.107.
Mason, E. C. M.; Ockerman, M. S.; Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). "Change-Agent-for-Equity (CAFE) model: A framework for school counselor identity" (PDF). Journal of School Counseling. 11: 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-08.
McMahon, H. G.; Mason, E. C. M.; Paisley, P. O. (2009). "School counselor educators as educational leaders promoting systemic change". Professional School Counseling. 13 (2): 116–124. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.116.
Perusse, R.; Goodnough, G. D.; Donegan, J.; Jones, C. (2004). "Perceptions of school counselors and school principals about the National Standards for School Counseling programs and the Transforming School Counseling Initiative". Professional School Counseling. 7: 152–161.
Reynolds, S. E., & Hines, P. L. (2001). Guiding all kids: Systemic guidance for achievement in schools. (2nd ed.). Bloomington, IN: American Student Achievement Institute.
Reynolds, S. E., & Hines, P. L. (2001). Vision-to-action: A step-by-step activity guide for systemic educational reform. (6th ed.). Bloomington, IN: American Student Achievement Institute.
Ross, D.; Herrington, D. (2006). "A comparative study of pre-professional counselor/principal perceptions of the role of the school counselor in public schools". National Forum of Educational Administration and Supervision Journal. 23: 1–18.
Ryan, T.; Kaffenberger, C. J.; Carroll, A. G. (2011). "Response to intervention: An opportunity for school counselor leadership". Professional School Counseling. 14: 211–221. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-14.211.
Saginak, K. A.; Dollarhide, C. T. (2006). "Leadership with administration: Securing administrative support for transforming your program". Journal of School Counseling. 4: 1–19.
Shillingford, M. A.; Lambie, G. W. (2010). "Contribution of professional school counselors' values and leadership practices to their programmatic service delivery". Professional School Counseling. 13 (4): 208–217. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.208.
Zalaquett, C. P. (2005). "Principals' perceptions of elementary school counselors' role and function". Professional School Counseling. 8: 451–457.


==== Outcome research in school counseling ====
Brooks-McNamara, V., & Torres, D. (2008). The reflective school counselor's guide to practitioner research: Skills and strategies for successful inquiry. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Bryan, J. A.; Day-Vines, N. L.; Holcomb-McCoy, C.; Moore-Thomas, C. (2010). "Using national education longitudinal data sets in school counseling research". Counselor Education and Supervision. 49 (4): 266–279. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2010.tb00102.x.
Carey, J.; Dimmitt, C. (2012). "School counseling and student outcomes: Summary of six statewide studies". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 146–153. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.146.
Carey, J.; Harrington, K.; Martin, I.; Hoffman, D. (2012). "A statewide evaluation of the outcomes of the implementation of ASCA National Model school counseling programs in rural and suburban Nebraska high schools". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 100–107. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.100.
Carey, J.; Harrington, K.; Martin, I.; Stevenson, D. (2012). "A statewide evaluation of the outcomes of the implementation of ASCA National Model school counseling programs in Utah high schools". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 89–99. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.89.
Clark, M. A.; Thompson, P.; Vialle, W. (2008). "Examining the gender gap in educational outcomes in public education: Involving pre-service school counsellors and teachers in cross-cultural and interdisciplinary research". International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling. 30: 52–66. doi:10.1007/s10447-007-9044-7.
Dimmitt, C.; Carey, J. C.; McGannon, W.; Henningson, I. (2005). "Identifying a school counseling research agenda: A Delphi study". Counselor Education & Supervision. 44 (3): 215–228. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2005.tb01748.x.
Dimmit, C.; Wilkerson, B. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling in Rhode Island: Access to services and student outcomes". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 125–135. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.125.
Falco, L. D.; Bauman, S.; Sumnicht, Z.; Engelstad, A. (2011). "Content analysis of the Professional School Counseling journal: The first ten years". Professional School Counseling. 14 (4): 271–277. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-14.271.
Foster, L. H.; Watson, T. S.; Meeks, C.; Young, J. S. (2002). "Single-subject research design for school counselors: Becoming an applied researcher". Professional School Counseling. 6: 146–159.
Kaffenberger, C.; Davis, T. (2009). "Introduction to special issue: A call for practitioner research". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 392–394. doi:10.5330/psc.s.2010-12.392.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Lapan, R. T., Whitcomb, S. A., & Aleman, N. M. (2012). Connecticut professional school counselors: College and career counseling services and smaller ratios benefit students. " Professional School Counseling 16," 117-124.
Lapan, R. T.; Gysbers, N. C.; Bragg, S.; Pierce, M. E. (2012). "Missouri professional school counselors: Ratios matter, especially in high-poverty schools". Professional School Counseling. 16: 117–124. doi:10.5330/PSC.n.2012-16.124.
Rowell, L. L. (2006). "Action research and school counseling: Closing the gap between research and practice". Professional School Counseling. 9 (4): 376–384. doi:10.5330/prsc.9.4.g777740821404674.
Whiston, S. C.; Tai, W. L.; Rahardja, D.; Eder, K. (2011). "School counseling outcome: A meta-analytic examination of interventions". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89: 37–55. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00059.x.
Whiston, S. C.; Sexton, T. L. (1998). "A review of school counseling outcome research: Implications for practice". Journal of Counseling & Development. 76 (4): 412–426. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.1998.tb02700.x.


==== Personal/social interventions: abuse, addictions, anxiety, bullying, conflict, obesity, peer mediation, self-mutilation, violence) ====
Barrett, K. M.; Lester, S. V.; Durham, J. C. (2011). "Child maltreatment and the advocacy role of professional school counselors". Journal of Social Action in Counseling and Psychology. 3: 86–103.
Burrow-Sanchez, J. J.; Call, M. E.; Zheng, R.; Drew, C. J. (2011). "How school counselors can help prevent online victimization". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89: 3–10. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00055.x.
Carney, J. V. (2008). Perceptions of bullying and associate trauma during adolescence. Professional School Counseling, 11, 179-188.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Chibbaro, J. S. (2007). "School counselors and the cyberbully: Interventions and implications". Professional School Counseling. 11: 65–68. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.65.
Cook, A. L.; Hayden, L. A. (2012). "Obesity prevention among Latino youth: School counselors' role in promoting healthy lifestyles". Professional School Counseling. 16: 7–17. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.7.
Curtis, R., Van Horne, J. W., Robertson, P., & Karvonen, M. (2010). Outcomes of a school-wide positive behavioral support program. "Professional School Counseling, 13  159-164.
Hagedorn, W. B.; Young, T. (2011). "Identifying and intervening with students exhibiting signs of gaming addiction and other addictive behaviors: Implications for professional school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 14 (4): 261–270. doi:10.1177/2156759X1101400401.
Lambie, G (2005). "Child abuse and neglect: A practical guide for professional school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 8: 249–258.
McAdams, C. R.; Schmidt, C. D. (2007). "How to help a bully: Recommendations for counseling the proactive aggressor". Professional School Counseling. 11 (2): 120–128. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.120.
Moyer, M. S.; Nelson, K. W. (2007). "Investigating and understanding self-mutilation: The student voice". Professional School Counseling. 11: 42–48. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.42.
Phillips, V. I.; Cornell, D. G. (2012). "Identifying victims of bullying: Use of counselor interviews to confirm peer nominations". Professional School Counseling. 15 (3): 123–131. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-15.123.
Rose, H.; Miller, L; Martinez, Y. (2009). "FRIENDS for Life": The results of a resilience-building, anxiety-prevention program in a Canadian elementary school". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 400–407. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.400.
Schellenberg, R.; Parks-Savage, A.; Rehfuss, M. (2007). "Reducing levels of elementary school violence with peer mediation". Professional School Counseling. 10 (5): 475–481. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.5.q7866077l3v5q044.
Vera, E. M.; Shin, R. Q.; Montgomery, G.; Mildner, C.; Speight, S. L (2004). "Conflict resolution, self-efficacy, self-control, and future orientation of urban adolescents". Professional School Counseling. 8: 73–80.
Walley, C. T., & Grothaus, T. (2013). A qualitative examination of school counselors’ training to recognize and respond to adolescent mental health issues. Journal of School Counseling, 11(11). Retrieved from http://www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/v11n11.pdf
Young, A.; Hardy, V.; Hamilton, C.; Biernesser, K.; Sun, L-L; Niebergall, S. (2009). "Empowering students: Using data to transform a bullying prevention and intervention program". Professional School Counseling. 12 (6): 413–420. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.413.


==== Poverty, homelessness, classism ====
Amatea, E. S.; West-Olatunji, C. A. (2007). "Joining the conversation about educating our poorest children: Emerging leadership roles for school counselors in high-poverty schools". Professional School Counseling. 11 (2): 81–89. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.81.
Gizir, C. A.; Aydin, G. (2009). "Protective factors contributing to the academic resilience of students living in poverty in Turkey". Professional School Counseling. 13: 38–49. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.38.
Grothaus, T.; Lorelle, S.; Anderson, K.; Knight, J. (2011). "Answering the call: Facilitating responsive services for students experiencing homelessness". Professional School Counseling. 14: 191–201. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2011-14.191.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Lapan, R. T.; Gysbers, N. C.; Bragg, S.; Pierce, M. E. (2012). "Missouri professional school counselors: Ratios matter, especially in high-poverty schools". Professional School Counseling. 16: 117–124. doi:10.5330/PSC.n.2012-16.124.
Van Velsor, P.; Orozco, G. L. (2007). "Involving low-income parents in the schools: Communitycentric strategies for school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 11: 17–24. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.17.


==== Rural school counseling ====
Carey, J.; Harrington, K.; Martin, I.; Hoffman, D. (2012). "A statewide evaluation of the outcomes of the implementation of ASCA National Model school counseling programs in rural and suburban Nebraska high schools". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 100–107. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.100.
Griffen, D.; Hutchins, B. C.; Meece, J. L. (2011). "Where do rural high school students go to find information about their futures?". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89 (2): 172–181. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6678.2011.tb00075.x.
Montero-Leitner, J.; Asner-Self, K. K.; Milde, C.; Leitner, D. W.; Skelton, D. (2006). "The role of the rural school counselor: Counselor, counselor-in-training, and principal perceptions". Professional School Counseling. 9 (3): 248–251. doi:10.5330/prsc.9.3.g108486473q49kh1.
Sutton, J. M.; Pearson, R. (2002). "The practice of school counseling in rural and small town high schools". Professional School Counseling. 5: 266–276.


==== School-family-community partnerships; parenting interventions for academic success ====
Aydin, G.; Bryan, J.; Duys, D. K. (2012). "School counselors' partnerships working with linguistically diverse families: An exploratory study". The School Community Journal. 22: 145–166.
Bailey, D. F.; Bradbury-Bailey, M. E. (2010). "Empowered youth programs: Partnerships for enhancing postsecondary outcomes of African American adolescents". Professional School Counseling. 14: 64–74. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.0vk554458027081n.
Bryan, J (2005). "Fostering educational resilience and academic achievement in urban schools through school-family-community partnerships". Professional School Counseling. 8: 219–227.
Bryan, J. A.; Griffin, D. (2010). "A multidimensional study of school-family-community partnership involvement: School, school counselor, and training factors". Professional School Counseling. 14: 75–86. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.q447832251421482.
Bryan, J.; Henry, L. (2008). "Strengths-based partnerships: A school-family-community partnership approach to empowering students". Professional School Counseling. 12 (2): 149–156. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.149.
Bryan, J., & Holcomb-McCoy, C. (2010). Collaboration and partnerships with families and communities. Professional School Counseling, 14  ii-v.
Bryan, J.; Holcomb-McCoy, C. (2004). "School counselors' perceptions of their involvement in school family community partnerships". Professional School Counseling. 7: 162–171.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Dotson-Blake, K. P. (2010). "Learning from each other: A portrait of family-school-community partnerships in the United States and Mexico". Professional School Counseling. 14: 101–114. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.e1v4q1r65t585048.
Epstein, J. L.; Van Voorhis, F. L. (2010). "School counselors' roles in developing partnerships with families and communities for student success". Professional School Counseling. 14: 1–14. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.m6070358408g9227.
Griffen, D., & Farris, A. (2010). School counselors and school-family-community collaboration: Finding resources through community asset mapping, 13  248-256.
Griffen, D.; Galassi, J. P. (2010). "Parent perceptions of barriers to academic success in a rural middle school". Professional School Counseling. 14: 87–100. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.9301852175552845.
Griffen, D.; Steen, S. (2010). "School-family-community partnerships: Applying Epstein's theory of the six types of involvement to school counselor practice". Professional School Counseling. 14 (4): 218–226. doi:10.5330/PSC.n.2010-13.218.
Holcomb-McCoy, C (2010). "Involving low-income parents and parents of color in college readiness activities: An exploratory study". Professional School Counseling. 14: 115–124. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.e3044v7567570t04.
Luke, M (2008). "School-family-community partnerships: Implications for school counselors to bridge the gap in urban schools". New York State School Counseling Journal. 5 (2): 13–22.
Moore-Thomas, C.; Day-Vines, N. L. (2010). "Culturally competent collaboration: School counselor collaboration with African American families and communities". Professional School Counseling. 14: 53–63. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.0876387q7466x634.
Sheely-Moore, A. I.; Bratton, S. C. (2010). "A strengths-based parenting intervention with low-income African American families". Professional School Counseling. 13 (3): 175–183. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.175.
Steen, S.; Noguera, P. A. (2010). "A broader and bolder approach to school reform: Expanded partnership roles for school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 14: 42–52. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.puq62087h7q70801.
Suarez-Orozco, C., Onaga, M., & de Lardemelle, C. (2010). Promoting academic engagement among immigrant adolescents through school-family-community collaboration. "Professional School Counseling, 14  15-26.
Walker, J. M. T.; Shenker, S.; Hoover-Dempsey, K. V. (2010). "Why do parents become involved in their children's education? Implications for school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 14: 27–41. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.768th8v77571hm7r.


==== Supervision, site supervisors, and school counselor education ====
Brott, P. E. (2006). "Counselor education accountability: Training the effective professional school counselor". Professional School Counseling. 10 (2): 179–187. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.2.d61g0v3738863652.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Curry, J. R.; Bickmore, D. (2012). "School counselor induction and the importance of mattering". Professional School Counseling. 15 (3): 110–122. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-15.110.
DeKruyf, L.; Pehrsson, D. E. (2011). "School counseling site supervisor training: An exploratory study". Counselor Education and Supervision. 50 (5): 314–327. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2011.tb01918.x.
Dixon, A. L.; Tucker, C.; Clark, M. A. (2010). "Integrating social justice advocacy with national standards of practice: Implications for school counselor education". Counselor Education and Supervision. 50 (2): 103–115. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2010.tb00112.x.
Gibbons, M. M.; Studer, J. R. (2008). "Suicide awareness training for faculty and staff: A training model for school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 11 (4): 272–276. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-11.272.
Glosoff, H. L.; Durham, J. C. (2010). "Using supervision to prepare social justice counseling advocates". Counselor Education and Supervision. 50 (2): 116–129. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2010.tb00113.x.
Hayes, R.; Paisley, P. (2002). "Transforming school counselor preparation programs". Theory into Practice. 41 (3): 170–176. doi:10.1207/s15430421tip4103_5.
Herlihy, B.; Gray, N.; McCollum, V. (2002). "Ethical and legal issues in school counselor supervision". Professional School Counseling. 6: 55–60.
House, R. M.; Sears, S. J. (2002). "Preparing school counselors to be leaders and advocates: A critical need in the new millennium". Theory into Practice. 41 (3): 154–162. doi:10.1207/s15430421tip4103_3.
Luke, M.; Bernard, J. M. (2006). "The school counseling supervision model: An extension of the discrimination model". Counselor Education and Supervision. 45 (4): 282–295. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2006.tb00004.x.
Luke, M.; Ellis, M. V.; Bernard, J. M. (2011). "School counselor supervisors' perceptions of the discrimination model of supervision". Counselor Education and Supervision. 50 (5): 328–343. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2011.tb01919.x.
Luke, M.; Gordon, C. (2011). "A discourse analysis of school counseling supervisory email". Counselor Education and Supervision. 50 (4): 274–291. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2011.tb00124.x.
Magnuson, S.; Black, L. L.; Norem, K. (2004). "Supervising school counselors and interns: Resources for site supervisors". Journal of Professional Counseling, Practice, Theory, & Research. 32 (2): 4–15. doi:10.1080/15566382.2004.12033803.
McDonald, K. E. (2011). "Teaching the 6th edition of APA style of writing in Counselor Education". Journal of Counselor Preparation and Supervision. 3: 123–141.
Miller, G. M.; Dollarhide, C. T. (2006). "Supervision in schools: Building pathways to excellence". Counselor Education and Supervision. 45 (4): 296–303. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2006.tb00005.x.
Mullen, J A.; Luke, M.; Drewes, A. (2007). "Supervision can be playful too: Play therapy techniques that enhance supervision". International Journal of Play Therapy. 16: 69–85. doi:10.1037/1555-6824.16.1.69.
Murphy, S.; Kaffenberger, C. (2007). "ASCA National Model: The foundation for supervision of practicum and internship students". Professional School Counseling. 10 (3): 289–296. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.3.d4t0g103013n88t6.
Ockerman, M. S., Mason, E. C. M., & Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). School counseling supervision in challenging times: The CAFE supervisor model. Journal of Counselor Preparation and Supervision, 5(2), Article 4. DOI:10.7729/51.0024 http://repository.wcsu.edu/jcps/vol5/iss2/4/
Paisley, P.; Hayes, R. (2003). "School counseling in the academic domain: Transformation in preparation and practice". Professional School Counseling. 6: 198–204.
Perusse, R.; Goodnough, G. E.; Noel, C. J. (2001). "Counselor preparation: A national survey of school counselor programs: Screening methods, faculty experiences, curricular content, and fieldwork experiences". Counselor Education & Supervision. 40: 252–262. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2001.tb01258.x.
Roberts, W. B.; Morotti, A. A.; Hendrick, C.; Tilbury, A. (2001). "Site supervisors of professional school counseling interns: Suggested guidelines". Professional School Counseling. 4: 208–215.
Savickas, M. L. (2011). "The centennial of Counselor Education: Origin and early development of a discipline". Journal of Counseling & Development. 89 (4): 500–503. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6676.2011.tb02848.x.
Schellenberg, R. (2012). The school counselor's guide to credentialing exams. New York: Routledge.
Stoltenberg, C. D., & McNeil, B. W. (2009). IDM supervision: An integrated developmental model for supervising counselors and therapists (3rd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Studer, J. R. (2006). Supervising the school counselor trainee: Guidelines for practice. Alexandria, VA:  American Counseling Association.
Studer, J. R. (2005). "Supervising counselors-in-training: A guide for field supervisors". Professional School Counseling. 8: 353–359.
Studer, J. R., & Diambra, J. F. (2010). A guide to practicum and internship for school counselor trainees. New York: Routledge.
Studer, J. R.; Oberman, A. (2006). "The use of the ASCA National Model in supervision". Professional School Counseling. 10: 82–87. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.1.f82t14475451422m.
Swank, J. M.; Tyson, L. (2012). "School counseling site supervisor training: A web-based approach". Professional School Counseling. 16: 40–48. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.40.
Wood, C.; Rayle, A. D. (2006). "A model of school counseling supervision: The goals, functions, roles, and systems model". Counselor Education and Supervision. 45 (4): 253–266. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2006.tb00002.x.


==== Technology and school counseling ====
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Milsom, A.; Bryant, J. (2006). "School counseling departmental web sites: What message do we send?". Professional School Counseling. 10 (2): 210–216. doi:10.5330/prsc.10.2.f36q578074204172.
Sabella, R. (2008). GuardingKids.com: A practical guide to keeping kids out of high-tech trouble. Minneapolis, MN: Educational Media.
Sabella, R. (2004). Counseling in the 21st Century: Using technology to improve practice. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.
Sabella, R. (2003). SchoolCounselor.com: A friendly and practical guide to the World Wide Web (2nd ed.). Minneapolis, MN: Educational Media.
Schellenberg, R. C. (2008). The new school counselor: Strategies for universal academic achievement. Rowman Littlefield Education.


==== Transforming school counseling roles and professional identity ====
Bodenhorn, N.; Skaggs, G. (2005). "Development of the School Counselor Self-Efficacy Scale". Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development. 38: 14–28. doi:10.1080/07481756.2005.11909766.
Burnham, J. J.; Jackson, M. (2000). "School counselor roles: Discrepancies between actual practice and existing models". Professional School Counseling. 4: 41–49.
Chen-Hayes, S. F., Ockerman, M. S., & Mason, E. C. M. (2014). 101 solutions for school counselors and leaders in challenging times. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Clark, M. A.; Amatea, E. (2004). "Teacher perceptions and expectations of school counselor contributions: Implications for program planning and training". Professional School Counseling. 8: 132–140.
DeKruyf, L., Auger, R., & Trice-Black, S. (2013). The role of school counselors in meeting students’ mental health needs: Examining issues of professional identity.  Professional School Counseling, 16(5), 271-282. doi: 10.5330/PSC.n.2013-16.271
Gordon, C. & Luke, M. (2011). Discursive negotiation of face via email: Professional identity development in school counseling supervision. Linguistics & Education. doi:10.1016/j.linged.2011.05.002.
Hart, P. J., & Jacobi, M. (1992). From gatekeeper to advocate: Transforming the role of the school counselor. New York: College Entrance Examination Board.
Hatch, T. (2008). Professional challenges in school counseling: Organizational, institutional and political. Journal of School Counseling, 6(22). Retrieved from http://www.jsc.montana.edu/articles/v6n22.pdf.
Holcomb-McCoy, C.; Bryan, J.; Rahill, S. (2002). "Importance of the school counseling CACREP standards: School counselors' perceptions". Professional School Counseling. 6: 112–119.
House, R. M.; Hayes, R. L. (2002). "School counselors: Becoming key players in school reform". Professional School Counseling. 5: 249–256.
House, R. M.; Martin, P. J. (1998). "Advocating for better futures for all students: A new vision for school counselors". Education. 119: 284–291.
Jackson, C. M.; Snow, B. M.; Boes, S. R.; Phillips, P. L.; Powell-Standard, R.; Painter, L. C. (2002). "Inducting the transformed school counselor into the profession". Theory into Practice. 41 (3): 177–185. doi:10.1207/s15430421tip4103_6.
Kurosawa, S. (2000). Sukuru kaunseringu katsudo no gohonbasira/Five important roles in school counselling. In M. Murayama (Ed.), Rinsyoshinrisi niyoru sukuru kaunsera: Jissai to tenbo (pp. 89–99). Tokyo, Shibundo.
Lambie, G. W.; Williamson, L. L. (2004). "The challenge to change from guidance counseling to professional school counseling: A historical proposition". Professional School Counseling. 8: 124–131.
Lapan, R. T. (2012). "Comprehensive school counseling programs: In some schools for some students but not in all schools for all students". Professional School Counseling. 16 (2): 84–88. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2012-16.84.
Martin, P. J. (2002). Transforming school counseling: A national perspective. "Theory into Practice 41, 148-153.
Martin, P. J., Robinson, S. G., & Erford, B. T. (2011). Transforming the school counseling profession. In B. T. Erford, Ed., Transforming the school counseling profession (3rd ed). (pp. 1–18). Boston: Pearson.
Mason, E. C. M.; Ockerman, M. S.; Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). "Change-Agent-for-Equity (CAFE) model: A framework for school counselor identity" (PDF). Journal of School Counseling. 11: 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-08.
Murayama, S. (2002). Rinsyoshinrisi niyoru sukuru maunsera no tenkai/The development of school counsellors by clinical psychologists. In M. Murayama (Ed.), Rinsyoshinrisi niyoru sukuru kaunsera: Jissai to tenbo (pp. 9–22). Tokyo: Shibundo.
Ockerman, M. S., Mason, E. C. M., & Chen-Hayes, S. F. (2013). School counseling supervision in challenging times: The CAFE supervisor model. Journal of Counselor Preparation and Supervision, 5(2), Article 4. DOI:10.7729/51.0024 http://repository.wcsu.edu/jcps/vol5/iss2/4/
Okamoto, J. (2002). Sukuru kaunsera tono renkei/Collaboration with school counsellors. In T. Matsuhara (Ed.), Sukuru kausera to renkei shita shido (pp. 4–13). Tokyo: Kyoikukaihatsukenkyusyo.
Paisley, P. O.; McMahon, G. (2001). "School counseling for the 21st Century: Challenges and opportunities". Professional School Counseling. 5: 106–115.
Rale, A. D.; Adams, J. R. (2007). "An exploration of 21st Century school counselors' daily work activities". Journal of School Counseling. 5: 1–45.
Reiner, S. M.; Colbert, R. D.; Perusse, R. (2009). "Teacher perceptions of the professional school counselor role: A national study". Professional School Counseling. 12 (5): 324–332. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-12.324.
Scarborough, J. L. (2005). "The school counselor activity rating scale: An instrument for gathering process data". Professional School Counseling. 8: 274–283.
Schellenberg, R. (2012). The school counselor's study guide for credentialing exams. New York: Routledge.
Schellenberg, R. (2008). The new school counselor: Strategies for universal academic achievement. Rowman Littlefield.
Sink, C. (2011). School-wide responsive services and the value of collaboration. Professional School Counseling, 14  ii-iv.
Steen, S.; Noguera, P. A. (2010). "A broader and bolder approach to school reform: Expanded partnership roles for school counselors". Professional School Counseling. 14: 42–52. doi:10.5330/prsc.14.1.puq62087h7q70801.
Stone, C. B., & Dahir, C. A. (2006). The transformed school counselor. Boston, MA: Lahaska Press/Houghton Mifflin.
Studer, J. R. (2008). "The school counselor as an emerging professional in the Japanese educational system". International Education. 37: 30–42.
Thomas, S. R. (2005). "The school counselor alumni peer consultation group". Counselor Education & Supervision. 45: 16–29. doi:10.1002/j.1556-6978.2005.tb00127.x.
Thomas, S. R.; DeKruyf, L.; Hetherington, P.; Lesicko, D. (2009). "Developing a global culture of collaboration for school counselors". Journal for International Counselor Education. 1: 15–31.
Wilkerson, K.; Eschbach, L. (2009). "Transformed school counseling: The impact of a graduate course on trainees' perceived readiness to develop comprehensive, data-driven programs". Professional School Counseling. 13: 30–37. doi:10.5330/psc.n.2010-13.30.


== External links ==
American School Counselor Association
Center for Excellence in School Counseling and Leadership
Center for School Counseling Outcome Research and Evaluation
Evidence Based School Counseling Conference
School and Career Counselors
National Association for College Admission Counseling
National Career Development Association