Virginia Information Technologies Agency

The Virginia Information Technologies Agency (VITA) is an executive department that provides information technology services to other Virginia state agencies. It is headed by Virginia's Chief Information Officer (CIO) who currently is Nelson P. Moe.  The current Chief Operating Officer (COO) is Jonathan X. Ozovek.  The current Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) is Dan Wolf.  The current Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) is Michael Watson.VITA is the designated provider of information technology (IT) services for government agencies and public bodies including local government entities and higher education.
VITA provides computing and telecommunication services, which it groups as  ‘custom infrastructure services’ and ‘bundled infrastructure services’. The ‘custom’ services are inclusive of the individual computing services required to process customer applications. The ‘bundled’ services are inclusive of hardware, software, maintenance and support. The rates that VITA charges to its clients are posted on its website and are approved by the Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission. In most cases, VITA charges the same rate to executive branch agencies and to other government entities.In the 2010 session of the General Assembly, Governor Bob McDonnell proposed legislation (SB 236), which was enacted on March 11, 2010, to have the Virginia Information Technologies Agency report to the Executive Branch instead of an independent board. The law abolished the Information Technology Investment Board (ITIB) and replaced it with a new Information Technology Advisory Council. Under the new arrangement, the Governor appoints the CIO, who reports to the Virginia Secretary of Technology.In September 2018, Governor Ralph Northam issued an executive order requiring Virginia state government agencies shift their technology services to cloud based platforms in order to modernize the Commonwealth's IT infrastructure.  Additionally, VITA has begun a transition to a multi-vendor IT model.  Towards the end of 2018, VITA terminated a single vendor relationship with Northrop Grumman and settled with the company to the amount of $35.8 million.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website