IRS Volunteer Income Tax Assistance Program

The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program is a national initiative sponsored by the Internal Revenue Service founded in 1971 by Gary Iskowitz at California State University, Northridge. Since the 1970s the program has grown to several thousand sites nationwide, partnering with non-profit organizations, local municipalities, and colleges and universities to file millions of returns every year. In Tax Year 2015 3.7 million returns were filed with a 94% accuracy rate according to Frank Nolden, Director of Stakeholder Partnerships, Education, and Communication/SPEC. The program is intended to provide service to low to moderate-income taxpayers, which the IRS has defined as those households making less than $56,000 per year.
Returns are prepared by IRS, tax law certified volunteers. Certificates in the program start at Basic, and are followed by Advanced. In order to prepare returns, a volunteer must be certified in one of these two base levels. There are additional, optional certifications for Health Savings Accounts (HSA), Military personnel, International tax issues, Foreign Student returns, and Puerto Rico returns. Volunteers are taught how to use tax software and specific tax law issues November to January of each year, with training schedules varying based on the program. One of the focal points of the VITA program is raising taxpayer awareness and receipt of the Earned Income Credit (EIC). The average refund for taxpayers claiming the Earned Income Credit was $2,450 as of 2015.Some military bases participate in the program with IRS agents training service members to complete military tax returns. Due to the complexity of foreign students' returns, they are prepared at major public universities such as Arizona State University by more advanced experts. 


== Scope of Service ==
The IRS requires that all returns are prepared by certified volunteers. There are various tax law, and non-tax law related certifications. Each volunteer, whether they will be preparing tax returns or acting as a greeter, or intake specialist, is required to pass a volunteer code of conduct exam, and an intake interview/quality review exam. Those volunteers who wish to become tax preparers must pass one of the tax law exams mentioned previously. To be considered proficient, volunteer must score a minimum of 80% on an exam to receive a passing score. Certifications last for one tax year, then the preparer must renew their certification. The different tax law certification levels are:

There are also a number of tax topics that are "out-of-scope" for the program regardless of a tax preparer's certification. Even professionally licensed volunteers are prohibited from providing advice to taxpayers on out-of-scope topics in the capacity of a volunteer. A brief outline of the services provided by vita:


== References ==

1) IRS 4012 VITA/TCE Volunteer Resource Guide (2) IRS 4491 VITA/TCE Training Guide (Includes content for Military Certification) (3) IRS 5157A VITA/TCE Affordable Care Act Taxpayer Scenarios (4) IRS 4942 VITA/TCE Specialty Course-Health Savings Accounts (HSA) (5) https://apps.irs.gov/app/vita/ (6) https://www.irs.gov/individuals/choose-your-tax-volunteer-role