Wellington College, Wellington

Wellington College is a boys secondary school in the Wellington, New Zealand suburb of Mount Victoria.


== History ==

Wellington College opened in 1867 as Wellington Grammar School in Woodward Street, though Sir George Grey gave the school a deed of endowment in 1853.  In 1869 the school moved to a new, spired, wooden building  on the hills above the central city in Clifton Terrace from where it could be seen from many places in Wellington. In 1874 the college opened in a much larger building at its present location. The former boarding establishment at the College, Firth House, was named after Joseph Firth, the headmaster from 1892 to 1921.
Wellington College's Pavilion, Firth House and the Gifford Observatory were opened on 1 December, 1924. The War Memorial Hall was opened on 2 March, 1928, financially supported by £6000 from the Old Boys' Association. The War Memorial Hall and classroom wings were demolished by the Ministry of Works and replaced in the 1960s with a new hall and seven-storey Tower classroom block due to its lack of earthquake reinforcements. The stained glass window from the front of the War Memorial Hall is now located in the front of the existing hall.
During the 1970s the Maths, Library and Technology blocks were opened, replacing the last of the War Memorial Hall building and classroom wings that opened in 1928. Also, the Old Boys Gymnasium was built on the eastern boundary of the campus replacing the swimming pool.
In 1980 Firth House was demolished to make way for a new gymnasium which opened in 1982. 1988 saw the opening of the Arts and Music block, and the Brierley Theatre, named after old boy Ron Brierley.
The first dedicated computer rooms in the College opened in 1994 in a new building located behind the school hall.
2001 saw the opening of the Science block, on the western boundary of the campus. In 2008 the Languages block opened, also located on the western boundary.
The campus also has many prefabricated buildings, some functioning as offices and some as classrooms.
The only "historical" buildings remaining on campus to this day are Firth Hall, the Pavilion and the Gifford Observatory.

In 2016, the College Hall was demolished to make way for a larger Assembly Hall and Performing Arts Centre, which would be able to hold the entire school with its growing population. In preparation for this, the staffroom was moved to Firth Hall, the Uniform Shop opened a new premise next to the Archives, and the Computer Block was opened on the first floor of Tower Block. Construction on the new hall commenced in September 2016, starting with the removal of the Memorial Window.


== About ==
Wellington College's enrolment zone mainly covers the central and western suburbs of Wellington (Rongotai College serves the southeastern suburbs, and Onslow College the northern suburbs).
Each year the school's rugby team plays in a competition with Nelson College, Christ's College, and Wanganui Collegiate School known as the "Quadrangular Tournament". Wellington are the reigning champions of this tournament and have been since 2003. Their current winning streak of ten titles in a row is the longest in the tournament's history.The school also competes in a local athletics competition known as "McEvedy Shield" along with St. Patrick's College (Town), St. Patrick's College, Silverstream and Rongotai College. Historically, Wellington College have won the shield 52 times since 1922, more than any other school. They are the current champions of the McEvedy Shield, winning four consecutive titles between 2015 and 2018.
It is next to Wellington East Girls' College, also in Mount Victoria, and shares with that college the Gifford Observatory. Although Wellington College is situated next to Wellington East Girls' College, its sister college is Wellington Girls' College located in Thorndon.
In 2011, 2012 and 2013, Wellington College earned the highest number of scholarships in the New Zealand scholarship exams.


== Board of Trustees ==
The Wellington College Board of Trustees consists of twelve elected and appointed members.


== Notable alumni ==


=== The Arts ===
Maxwell Fernie - organist, conductor and music teacher
Alexander Grant, dancer
Jonathan Harlen, author
Dai Henwood - comedian
Raybon Kan - writer and comedian
Bret McKenzie - Academy Award-winning songwriter and member of Flight of the Conchords
John Mulgan - editor, writer, journalist and Army officer
Robert J. Pope  - songwriter, poet, cricketer
Karl Urban - actor
Barnaby Weir - Singer The Black Seeds


=== Broadcasting & journalism ===
Edward George Honey - Australian journalist credited by some as the originator of the Two-minute silence tradition
John Campbell - current events TV hostKeith Quinn - TV & radio sports presenter
Chris Spence - journalist
Bryan Waddle - cricket commentator & radio presenter


=== Business ===
Ron Brierley - businessman
Alan Gibbs - businessman
Arthur Myers - businessman, politician
Steve Outtrim - businessman
Frank Renouf - businessman


=== Public service ===
Henry Avery, New Zealand's Quartermaster General during World War Two and former All Black
Grafton Francis Bothamley - Clerk of the New Zealand House of Representatives
Arthur Coningham - World War II commander and World War I Air Ace. Portrayed in the film Patton
Ken Douglas, trade union leader and politician
Bernard Freyberg, Governor-General, World War I VC Winner and World War II commander
Thomas Gault - Justice of the Supreme Court of New Zealand
Ralph Grey, last Governor of Northern Ireland (also attended Scots College)
Frederick Melrose Horowhenua Hanson, World War II commander, subsequently Commissioner of Works at the Ministry of Works
Michael Hardie Boys - former Governor-General of New Zealand
Michael Heron - former Solicitor-General of New Zealand (former Head Prefect)
Thomas Charles Atkinson Hislop - Mayor of Wellington from 1931 to 1945
Don Hunn CNZM - senior New Zealand diplomat, civil servant, and State Services Commissioner
Ngatata Love - academic and Treaty negotiator
Rex Mason - politician
Matthew Oram - lawyer, politician, Speaker of Parliament
Graham Beresford Parkinson - World War II commander
Paul Reeves - former Governor-General of New Zealand
Adrian G. Rodda - senior civil servant and Chairman of the State Services Commission
Eric Alwyn Roussell - Clerk of the New Zealand House of Representatives
William Ball Sutch, New Zealand public servant, put on trial for espionage
Ray Wallace, Mayor of Lower Hutt


=== Science ===
George Leslie Adkin - farmer, geologist, ethnologist, photographer, and environmentalist.
David Benney - emeritus professor and former head of the Department of Mathematics at MIT
Ian Foster - computer scientist
William Pickering - former Head of the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (space scientist)
Philip Robertson - chemist, university professor and writer
Jonathan Sarfati - creationist, scientist, and New Zealand Chess Champion


=== Sport ===
Tom Blundell (cricketer) - cricketer, plays for Wellington Firebirds and Black Caps
Leo Bertos - football (soccer) player with the Wellington Phoenix and New Zealand All Whites.
Harry Boam - cricketer, plays for Wellington Firebirds
Craig Bradshaw - Former Professional Basketballer, and member of New Zealand Tall Blacks.
George Bridgewater - New Zealand rower
Tim Brown - football (soccer) player with the Wellington Phoenix and New Zealand All Whites.
Ralph Caulton - All Black
Ross Durant - football (soccer) player for New Zealand All Whites
Simon Elliott - football (soccer) player with the San Jose Earthquakes and New Zealand All Whites
Marc Ellis - former All Black, entertainer, businessman
James Franklin - cricketer, plays for Black Caps and Wellington Firebirds
Ken Gray - All Black
Onny Parun - tennis player
Dion Prewster - Professional Basketballer, and member of New Zealand Tall Blacks.
Lima Sopoaga - All Black
Peter Taylor - New Zealand rower
Neemia Tialata - All Black
Filo Tiatia - All Black
Dane Coles - All Black
Ian Uttley - All Black
Nelson Asofa-Solomona - rugby league player for Melbourne Storm


== References ==

2. A.W Beasley, The Light Accepted : 125 Years of Wellington College, Board of Trustees of Wellington College, Wellington, 1992


== External links ==
Official website
Source for examination results
Wellington College and the First World War (from the Ministry of Culture and Heritage)
St Pats take McEvedy Shield
Map showing school (1892 Thos Ward Map No 76; low definition version)