Bishopston, Swansea

Bishopston (Welsh: Llandeilo Ferwallt) is a hamlet and community situated on the Gower Peninsula, some 6 miles (9.7 km) west south west of the centre of Swansea in South Wales. Forming part of the Bishopston ward of the City and County of Swansea, it is one of the largest villages on Gower. Bishopston has its own rugby club, South Gower RFC, and its own primary and comprehensive schools. Local beaches include Brandy Cove, Caswell Bay and Pwll Du. The electoral ward consists of part or all of the following areas: Barland Common, Caswell, Clyne Common(Rhos-Glyn), Bishopston(Llandeilo-ferwallt), Manselfield(Maesyfaen), Murton(Morthw), Oldway(Henlôn) in the parliamentary constituency of Gower. It is bounded by the Bristol Channel to the south; and the wards of: Pennard to the west; Fairwood(Welsh: Llwynffair) to the north; and Mayals, West Cross(Crwys Fawr) and Newton(Trenewydd)to the east.
It is partly within the Gower Peninsula Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB).
The church, located at the head of Bishopston Valley, is dedicated to St Teilo who gives the village its Welsh name. Bishopston gives its name to the Bishopston Mudstone, a name used by geologists to refer to a rock formation with a widespread occurrence in south Wales.


== Shops and services ==
Bishopston has several shops including a Co-Op and Post Office. Other local services include a hotel and cafe, three public houses, a petrol station, retirement homes, post office, church halls, sports hall, medical centre and children's play area.


== Tourist attractions ==

Many people visiting Bishopston are attracted to its coastline, mainly Caswell Bay because of its easy accessibility, car parking, seasonal bus service, shops and cafes, public toilets, open-air showers, and seasonal lifeguarding. Other Bishopston beaches, such as Pwll Du and Brandy Cove, which can only be visited on foot, remain untouched by the majority of visitors.


== Population and housing ==
The population of Bishopston has increased steadily from the beginning of the 19th century.  In 1801, the first census of England and Wales reported that 303 people were living in 73 houses in the parish of Bishopston.  By 1931 the population had increased to around 1,500 people living in 369 houses.  In 2001 the population of the village was 3,341.  The village experienced significant growth between the First and Second World Wars and in the 1960s.
Bishopston's rural location has influenced the pattern of its development. Most dwellings are detached or semi-detached and benefit from generous gardens. As a result, property in Bishopston is expensive by the standards of most of South Wales and is beyond the reach of many first time buyers.  Nearly all of the property in Bishopston is privately owned, with only 1% of homes rented from the local authority.Bishopston and the Gower was named one of the best places to live in Wales in 2017.


== References ==

http://www.bishopston.swansea.sch.uk/


== External links ==
Bishopston Comprehensive School
Bishopston Church
Holiday and background information on the village of Bishopston
Parish church of St Teilo
South Gower Rugby Club
Gower Peninsula AONB