Tattoo (Rory Gallagher album)

Tattoo is the fifth album released by Rory Gallagher. It demonstrated Gallagher's eclectic range of musical influences starting with the blues and adding elements from jazz, folk, and country.


== Background ==
Tattoo showcased the skill of Gallagher and his band across a number of genres from Delta and Chicago blues, the jazz-influenced "They Don't Make Them Like You Anymore" and blues-rock tracks such as "Tattoo'd Lady". According to his brother, Gallagher was in a "prolific and confident mood" when he recorded it.  The album showcased Gallagher's writing ability resulting in several songs that would go on to become staples of his live act. Tattoo'd Lady reflects Gallagher's love for the fairground life and its similarities to life on the road. "Cradle Rock" was inspired by the happy coincidence that Gallagher "rocked literally all his life" having been born at the "Rock Hospital" in Ballyshannon, Ireland. "Cradle Rock" was also covered by Joe Bonamassa as the first track on his debut album A New Day Yesterday.  Tattoo illustrates Gallagher's proficiency with all manner of guitar playing from acoustic to electric, various types of slide guitar, and mandolin. On the song "They Don't Make Them Like You Anymore" Rory used the bouzouki of Greek virtuoso Manolis Chiotis. Rory was a big fan of the Greek virtuoso, and as a tribute played "Perasmenes mou agapes" as an intro to the above-mentioned song.


== Track listing ==
All songs composed by Rory Gallagher except where noted.
Side one

"Tattoo'd Lady" – 4:34
"Cradle Rock" – 6:15
"20:20 Vision" – 4:02
"They Don't Make Them Like You Anymore" – 4:05
"Livin' Like a Trucker" – 4:19Side two

"Sleep on a Clothes Line" – 5:13
"Who's That Coming" – 7:09
"A Million Miles Away" – 6:55
"Admit It" – 4:19CD bonus track

"Tucson, Arizona" – 3:47
"Just a Little Bit" (Rosco Gordon) – 7:43Track listing on French LP

Side 1 : Tattoo'd Lady - They Don't Make... - A Million Miles Away - Who's That Coming - Livin' Like a Trucker
Side 2 : Cradle Rock - Admit It - 20:20 Vision - Sleep on a Clothes Line


== Personnel ==
Rory Gallagher – guitars, vocals, harmonica, saxophone, mandolin, bouzouki
Gerry McAvoy – bass guitar
Lou Martin – keyboards, accordion
Rod de'Ath – drums, percussionTechnicalCarlos Olms - engineer
Robin Sylvester - remixing engineer
Robin Lawrie - cover illustration


== References ==


== External links ==
More Information about the album on Rory Gallagher's Official Site