Durham Regional Police Service

The Durham Regional Police Service (DRPS) is the police service operated by and serving the Regional Municipality of Durham, Ontario, Canada. The force serves the following local municipalities, with a combined population of 645,862:
Pickering, Ontario
Oshawa, Ontario
Whitby, Ontario
Ajax, Ontario
Clarington, Ontario
Scugog, Ontario
Brock, Ontario
Uxbridge, OntarioThe DRPS and York Regional Police are the only two police forces in the Greater Toronto Area with air support.
The DRPS was formed in 1974 through the amalgamation of a number of local police forces in the area, coinciding with the establishment of the Regional Municipality of Durham.
In late May 2019, after a request by the Ministry of the Solicitor General (Ontario), the Ontario Civilian Police Commission issued an order that appointed a retired Toronto deputy chief, Mike Federico, as administrator to oversee the force during the OCPC investigation after some of the senior ranks were alleged to have been corrupt and of an abuse of power. As of May 24, 2019, none of the allegations had been proven. Federico’s responsibilities were to include "approving promotions and overseeing all internal discipline". The allegations were first brought to light in an April 19 report in the Toronto Star; at the time, a lawyer representing Chief Paul Martin said the allegations are "false and defamatory". 


== Organization ==
DRPS is led by:

Chief of Police Paul Martin
Deputy Chief Todd Rollauer (operations)
Deputy Chief Dean Bertrim (operational support)
Chief Administrative Officer Stan MacLellanDurham Regional Police Headquarters is in Whitby, Ontario at the Regional Municipality of Durham Headquarters building with a 2014 budget of $177.68 millionIn October 2008, the Durham Regional Police Service was named one of "Canada's Top 100 Employers" by Mediacorp Canada Inc. and was featured in Maclean's newsmagazine. Later that month, it was also named one of Greater Toronto's Top Employers, which was announced by the Toronto Star newspaper.Durham Regional Police is a member of OALEP.


=== Police senior officers ===
The day-to-day and regional operations are commanded by senior officers:

Superintendent
Inspector-duty inspector
Civilian directors and managers


=== Police officers ===
Detective sergeant
Staff sergeant
Detective
Sergeant
Detective constable
Senior constable
Constable - 1st class
Constable - 2nd class
Constable - 3rd class
Constable - 4th class
Special court constables


== Operational support units ==
In 2016, the Durham Regional Police Service had an authorized strength of 871 sworn members and 304 civilians.Some of the units within the force are:

Air support unit
Auxiliary unit (auxiliary constable)
Canine unit
Case management unit
Central cellblock unit
Communications-911 unit
Community services unit
Corporate communications unit
Courts unit
Crime analysis unit
Diversity unit
Domestic violence investigative unit
Drug enforcement unit
E-crimes unit
Emergency measures/labour liaison unit
Explosive disposal unit
Facilities management unit
Financial services unit
Firearms unit
Fleet services unit
Forensic identification unit
Fraud unit
Freedom of information unit
Gun and gang unit
General occurrence auditing unit
Health, wellness and safety unit
Homicide unit
Hostage negotiators
Human resources unit
Information technology unit
Legal services unit
Marine unit
Major incident command
Mental health unit
Offender management unit
Patrol support unit
Polygraph unit
Prisoner transport unit
Professional standards unit
Property unit
Public order unit
Quality assurance unit
Regional youth unit
Robbery unit
Records unit
Senior support unit
Sexual assault and child abuse unit
Strategic planning unit
Surveillance unit
Tactical support unit
Technical services section
Threat assessment unit
Traffic services branch
Victim services unit
Volunteer unit
Warrant liaison unit


== Policing divisions ==
The force is organized into several divisions

West Division. Serving Ajax and Pickering
Central West Division. Serving Whitby and Western Oshawa
Central East Division. Serving Oshawa
East Division. Serving Clarington, Oshawa and Scugog
North Division. Serving Brock, Scugog and UxbridgeDurham Regional Police is one of two Greater Toronto Area police forces with air capability (York Regional Police, excluding Ontario Provincial Police).

Some vehicles bear the motto "Leaders in Community Safety".


== Uniform ==
The DRP crest is used on vehicles, headgear and uniforms, and consists of St. Edward's Crown over a round blue shield with the legend "Durham Regional Police" in white, encircling a red maple leaf overlaid with gold scales of justice. The crest is based on that of the former City of Oshawa police department, with the maple leaf and scales replacing the city's coat of arms.
Officers are issued Glock .40 caliber pistols.


== Tactical support unit ==
TSU is responsible for handling dangerous situations not handled by regular uniformed officers. The Durham Regional Police TSU also has a mutual-aid agreement with the York Regional Police Emergency Response Unit. In the event of a large-scale event, or a callout that could take a significant amount of time, both departments provide assistance to one another.


== Marine unit ==
The marine unit is responsible for the enforcement of three bodies of water in the region Lake Ontario, Lake Scugog, and Lake Simcoe the area of and around Beaverton, Thorah Island and parts of the Trent-Severn Waterway. Members of the marine unit are specially trained for marine enforcement and rescue duties, including ice rescue. The unit is attached to the traffic enforcement unit.
The Durham Regional Police Marine Unit also has a mutual aid agreement with the Toronto Police, for Lake Ontario as well as side-scan sonar and ROV. and with the York Regional Police for Lake Simcoe as well as side-scan sonar and diver services. In the event of a large-scale event, or a call-out that could take a significant amount of manpower, these police services provide mutual assistance to one another.
The Marine Unit consists of four officers. {two full-time summer, one part-time, as well as a part-time sergeant.
Additional SAR support provided by Pickering Auxiliary Rescue Association, Canadian Coast Guard and Canadian Forces 424 Squadron (air support from CFB Trenton).


=== Equipment ===
a 26-foot Zodiac RHIB (2011) with two 200 hp Mercury outboard engines - transported by trailer to Lake Scugog and Lake Simcoe
a 34-foot Hike Metal Products patrol with two 260 hp supercharged diesel Volvo engines, search and rescue vessel (2004) - named "David Edwards"


== See also ==
Durham Regional Police is part of Durham Region's Emergency Services and works with:

Durham Region EMS
Fire Services in Durham Region


== References ==


== External links ==
Durham Regional Police Service