Rob Frazier

Rob Frazier (born October 31, 1953) is a Christian artist, musician, songwriter, producer, worship leader, speaker, and pastor.
Frazier is the son of a pastor, W. Burwell Frazier, founder of Warrington Fellowship Church. He was raised in Warminster, Bucks County, near Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and studied in King's College, New York City.
Over the years, Frazier has collaborated with numerous artists in and outside the contemporary Christian music scene, including co-writing the 1982 Kansas hit "Play the Game Tonight".
In 1979 he joined the Christian rock group Petra, where he played the keyboards and guitar while trading lead vocal duties with Greg X. Volz on the album Washes Whiter Than.
After Petra, Frazier embarked in a solo career releasing several albums, as well as frequently collaborating with Steve Camp. He wrote and performed numerous top 10 Christian songs including "Cut it Away", "Train Up a Child", "He Is All You Need" (later recorded by co-writer Steve Camp), "(Doesn't Anybody Pray in) This Town", "Break My Heart", "Got Your Word On It", "Go Through Fire", "Love is Sacrifice", "Sins of Billions", "We Are One", "Forgiven" and "Watching Over Me."   He also co-wrote songs for other Christian artists including Margaret Becker, Steve Camp, Rick Cua, Kenny Marks, Geoff Moore, Petra, Ricky Skaggs and Dick Tunney.
Toward the end of his full-time artist career, he attended Regent University Divinity School earning a Masters in Practical Theology in 2003. By that time he had joined the pastoral staff of Belmont Church, a large non-denominational church in Nashville where he remained until 2012. For several years after that, he served as Chaplain and Counselor at Nashville Rescue Mission, a homeless shelter and drug rehabilitation center. In 2017 he joined staff of A.C.T. Intl. (Artists in Christian Testimony), which mobilizes creatives for worldwide ministry on a non-profit basis. He is still active as a songwriter.


== Solo discography ==
Cut It Away (1984)
This Town (1986)
Heartland (1990)
Retrospect (1992)
The Long Run (1993)
The Things I Say (1997)
Rob Frazier's Blues Farmers - Jammin' The Blues (1999)Note: Frazier's "Cut It Away" and "This Town" have never been released to CD.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website