Wee Sing

The Wee Sing Video Series is a collection of live action musical videos for children, adapted from the songbook series published by Price Stern Sloan. Many of them contained colorful characters that taught lessons to children, like being young at heart or overcoming personal challenges with the help of friends. The series was started in 1985 and ended in 1996. By 2005, the first nine videos in it were released on DVD.


== Wee Sing Together (1985) ==
Sally gets a surprise when her two favorite stuffed animals, Melody Mouse (dressed up as a ballerina) and Hum Bear magically come to life and take her, along her brother Jonathan and their dog Bingo to the magical Wee Sing Park for Sally's birthday party, where they meet a marching band. They sing and dance and learn how to conquer their fears when a storm hits.


=== Soundtrack ===
"The More Wee Sing Together"
"Skidamarink"
"Head and Shoulders, Knees and Toes"
"The Finger Band"
"Walking, Walking"
"Rickety, Tickety"
"Little Peter Rabbit"
"I'm a Little Teapot"
"The Alphabet Song"
"Bingo"
"Sally's Wearing a Red Dress"
"Old MacDonald Had a Farm"
"Looby Loo"
"Rain, Rain, Go Away"
"There is Thunder"
"Itsy Bitsy Spider"
"If You're Happy and You Know It"
"Reach for the Sky"
"My Name and Address"
"Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star"
"Teddy Bear, Teddy Bear"
"The More Wee Sing Together (reprise)"


== King Cole's Party (1987) ==
Jack, Jill, Mary, and Little Boy Blue  journey toward King Cole's palace to join him and his other subjects in celebrating 100 years of peace in the kingdom, bringing various gifts: a kitten, a pair of mittens, and a fuzzy blanket, among other things. The main message is that the best gifts come from the heart, but it also teaches the importance of helping others and using good manners.


=== Soundtrack ===
"Old King Cole"
"Betty Botter"
"Pat-A-Cake"
"Polly, Put the Kettle On"
"Sing a Song of Sixpence"
"Peas Porridge Hot"
"Jack and Jill"
"Mary Had a Little Lamb"
"Little Boy Blue"
"Walking Chant"
"Six Little Ducks"
"There Was a Crooked Man"
"Wibbleton to Wobbleton"
"Sea-Saw, Sac-Ra-Down"
"This Old Man"
"Humpty Dumpty"
"Little Bo Peep"
"Little Jack Horner"
"Little Miss Muffet"
"Rub-A-Dub-Dub"
"Jack, Be Nimble"
"Little Tommy Tucker"
"Peter Piper"
"Old King Cole (reprise)"
"Peas Porridge Hot (reprise)"


== Grandpa's Magical Toys (1988) ==
A boy named Peter and his friends, David and Sarah, visit his grandfather and discover his many toys (including Punchinello) and their secrets, all in the search of a missing music box key that he misplaced. When his grandfather leaves the room, David bumps into a music box which shrinks them, and the toys come to life. This story encourages children and adults alike that no matter how old you are on the outside or what body type you have, you can always stay young at heart.


=== Soundtrack ===
”Say, Say, Oh Playmate”
"Good Morning"
"Punchinello"
"A Sailor Went to Sea, Sea, Sea"
"Long Legged Sailor"
"The Muffin Man"
"One Potato, Two Potato"
"Pretty Little Dutch Girl"
"I Love Coffee, I Love Tea"
"Mabel, Mabel" / "Miss, Miss"
"The Farmer in the Dell"
"Did You Ever See a Lassie?"
"The Hokey Pokey"
"Who Stole the Cookies From the Cookie Jar?"
"Roll that Red Ball"
"One, Two, Buckle My Shoe"
"One, Two, Three O'Leary" / "One, Two, Three A-Twirlsy"
"The Merry-Go-Round"
"Hambone"
"Say, Say, Oh Playmate (reprise)"


== Wee Sing in Sillyville (1989) ==
Two children named Laurie and Scott, along with their dog Barney, magically enter their coloring book to help an aptly named Sillywhim resolve the townspeople's differences. They encounter the four yellow Spurtlegurgles, the three blue Twirlypops, the two green Jingleheimers and three Fruggy Frogs, the family of red Bittybooties and Purple Pasha and her menagerie. The primary message is that being different should never be a barrier to being friends.


=== Soundtrack ===
"Do Your Ears Hang Low?"
"We're Here Because We're Here"
"Boom, Boom, Ain't It Great to Be Crazy?"
"Michael Finnegan / No, No, Yes, Yes"
"Once an Austrian Went Yodeling"
"Grasshopper"
"John Jacob Jingleheimer Schmidt"
"Little Green Frog"
"Frog Round"
"Down by the Bay"
"Risseldy, Rosseldy"
"Bitty Booty Baby Had a Cold Upon His Chest"
"One Bottle o'Pop"
"I'm a Nut"
"Rum Sum Sum"
"Five In the Bed"
"Be Kind to Your Web-Footed Friends"
"Make New Friends"
"Let Us Sing Together"


== The Best Christmas Ever! (1990) ==
Just five days before Christmas, when Poofer the Elf tries to help his best friend Gusty the Elf, he gets lost and winds up in the home of the Smiths, a loving family, and meets their caroling neighbors as well. He and the Smiths journey to the North Pole in an effort to aid Gusty, who has grown unexceptionably clumsy. After the elves, and even Santa Claus himself wrestle with the issue, Susie realizes what's wrong - Gusty needs a new pair of glasses. This story encourages children to wear glasses (if they need them), but also has subtle messages about cultural diversity, helping others, the importance of working together, the importance of wearing a seat belt and helmet while traveling, and that an adoptive family can be as close and loving as any other.


=== Soundtrack ===
"We Wish You a Merry Christmas"
"Tapping"
"O Christmas Tree"
"Two Little Christmas Trees"
"Mother's Knives and Forks"
"Here We Come A-Caroling"
"Deck the Halls"
"Christmas Day Will Soon Be Here"
"When Santa Comes"
"The Angel Band"
"Little Bells of Christmas"
"Star Light, Star Bright"
"Christmas Wrap"
"Christmas is Coming"
"Chubby Little Snowman / Here Is The Chimney"
"Gusty the Elf"
"Jolly Old Saint Nicholas"
"Jingle Bells"
"Down Through the Chimney"
"Santa Claus is Coming"
"Up On The Housetop"
"Twas The Night Before Christmas"


== Wee Singdom: The Land of Music and Fun (1996) ==
Wee Sing characters Punchinello, Sillywhim, Little Bunny Foo Foo, Weeber, Snoodle and Doodle, and Trunky (originally Tusky) who are all from earlier Wee Sing Videos, ride the Wee Sing train to Sing-a-Ling-a-Land where Singaling (voiced by Mikey Moran) and Warbly (voiced by Maureen Robinson) are hosting a big musical party called "The Wee Sing Festival". Sing-a-Ling-a-Land also happens to be an extension of Tim and Annie's game board. However, the main guest of honor (a singing rainbow) is missing, so as each character performs his or her respective performance, Chug-a-Long the engine and Cubby the caboose are sent to go look for her by asking a cirrus, stratus, cumulus cloud where she disappeared too. Eventually, she is found after Tim and Annie finds her on his gameboard playing with their cat, Staccato, and as a reward, they are invited to attend the Wee Sing Festival, and the singing rainbow is able to perform.


=== Soundtrack ===
"Off We Go to Sing-A-Ling-A-Land"
"We Welcome You"
"You're My Special Friend"
"Time for the Show to Start"
"Going on a Bunny Hunt"
"Nobody Knows the Trouble I've Seen"
"Rig-A-Jig-Jig"
"Frére Jacques"
"Mary Had a Little Lamb"
"I Am a Cirrus Cloud"
"I Am a Stratus Cloud"
"Juggling, Juggling, Toss the Ball"
"The Marching Dance"
"The Rhyming Game"
"It Isn't Any Trouble Just to Rhyme a Word Or Two"
"The Reflection Dance"
"I Am a Cumulus Cloud"
"Polly Wolly Doodle"
"One Elephant Went Out to Play"
"Colors of the Rainbow"
"We Sing-A-Ling-A-Ling with All Our Hearts to You"


== Wee Sing Favorites: Animal Songs (1996) ==
This video features 17 clips from different Wee Sing Videos that include an animal song
with each of the intervals between them featuring an animated clip of Singaling (voiced by Mona Marshall) and Warbly (voiced by Penny Sweet).


=== Soundtrack ===
"Bingo (From Wee Sing Together)"
"I Had a Little Rooster (From The Wee Sing Train)"
"Little Baby Ottie (From Wee Sing Under the Sea)"
"Little Miss Muffet (From King Cole's Party)"
"The Incy Wincy Spider (From Wee Sing Together)"
"Do Your Ears Hang Low? (From Wee Sing in Sillyville)"
"The Old Gray Mare (From The Wee Sing Train)"
"Grizzly Bear (From Wee Sing in the Big Rock Candy Mountains)"
"One, Two, Whale That's Blue (From Wee Sing Under the Sea)"
"Six Little Ducks (From King Cole's Party)"
"Grasshoppers Three / The Fly Has Married the Bumblebee (From Wee Sing in the Big Rock Candy Mountains)"
"Little Peter Rabbit (From Wee Sing Together)"
"Frog Round (From Wee Sing in Sillyville)"
"Mary Had a Little Lamb (From King Cole's Party)"
"I'm a Hermit Crab (From Wee Sing Under the Sea)"
"Two Little Blackbirds Sitting on a Hill (From The Wee Sing Train)"
"Old MacDonald Had a Farm (From Wee Sing Together)"


== Wee Sing Favorites: Classic Songs for Kids (1996) ==
This video features 16 clips from different Wee Sing Videos that include a classic children's song
with each of the intervals between them featuring an animated clip of Singaling (voiced by Mona Marshall) and Warbly (voiced by Penny Sweet).


=== Soundtrack ===
"The Alphabet Song (From Wee Sing Together)"
"Jack and Jill (From King Cole's Party)"
"The Farmer in the Dell (From Grandpa's Magical Toys)"
"Row, Row, Row Your Boat (From Wee Sing in the Big Rock Candy Mountains)"
"Rain, Rain, Go Away (From Wee Sing Together)"
"Home On the Range (From The Wee Sing Train)"
"The Hokey Pokey (From Grandpa's Magical Toys)"
"Jack be Nimble (From King Cole's Party)"
"Boom, Boom, Ain't it Great to be Crazy? (From Wee Sing in Sillyville)"
"Ring Around the Rosie (From Wee Sing in the Big Rock Candy Mountains)"
"Humpty Dumpty (From King Cole's Party)"
"The Muffin Man (From Grandpa's Magical Toys)"
"Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star (From Wee Sing Together)"
"Star Light, Star Bright (From The Best Christmas Ever)"
"Oh Say, Oh Say, Playmate (From Grandpa's Magical Toys)"
"When The Saints Go Marching In (from Wee Sing In The Marvelous Musical Mansion)"


== Wee Sing: Silly Songs (1982) ==
Let's not sing!
Song List:

"The Green Grass Grows All Around"


== External links ==
Official Wee Sing Website