Crawford Bay, British Columbia

Crawford Bay is a community of approximately 350 people, situated in the Purcell mountain range on the eastern shore of Kootenay Lake in the Southern Interior of British Columbia, Canada.  The community is located on Highyway 3A, 76 kilometres by road north of Creston and 48 kilometres by road and ferry northeast across Kootenay Lake from Nelson.


== History, geography, demographics and economy ==
The  West Kootenay region of British Columbia, where the community of Crawford Bay is situated, is part of the traditional territories of the Sinixt and Ktunaxa peoples.


== Arts, culture, attractions and sports ==
Crawford Bay plays host to a music festival each July.  The Starbelly Jam, an annual event since 1999, is a weekend outdoor music festival featuring a wide variety of musical styles.The village centre, along Highway 3A, is home to a collection of working artisan studios including: a forge, broommaker, potters, weavers, copper enamellist, leatherworkers, and jewellers.Crawford Bay hosts an annual autumn agricultural fair, The Kootenay Lake Fall Fair, which dates back to 1910 and features a juried display of locally grown produce, homemade goods and artistic creations.Kokanee Springs Golf Resort, located within Crawford Bay, is a championship 18-hole course designed by Norman H. Woods in 1968.


== Government and infrastructure ==
The Regional District of Central Kootenay (RDCK) is the local governing body for Crawford Bay.  The village lies within Electoral Area A in the RDCK and the current director for Area A is Garry Jackman.  Provincially, Crawford Bay lies within the electoral riding of Nelson-Creston, currently represented in the provincial legislature by NDP MLA Michelle Mungall.  Federally, Crawford Bay is part of the Kootenay-Columbia riding, currently represented by NDP MP Wayne Stetski.


== Education and media ==
The local Crawford Bay School, offers kindergarten to Grade 12 and serves the entire eastern shore of Kootenay Lake.  In 2009, with the old school at the end of its lifetime and no longer adequate for the communities' needs, a new school building was constructed on a larger piece of land nearby. It became the first school in British Columbia to meet the LEED Green Building Rating System requirements.  The school design also received a "Wood WORKS! Community Recognition Award" from the Canada Wood Council.Also serving the "east shore" community, which includes Crawford Bay, is a local newspaper called The Eastshore Mainstreet.  The paper is published monthly and focuses on local issues and events.


== Notable residents ==
Baba Brinkman, Canadian rapper and playwright born in the nearby town of Riondel and a graduate of Crawford Bay School.
Tom "Comet" Hulland, stunt performer and special effects artist born in the area. Tom has worked with Madonna, Penn and Teller and Sir Richard Branson, among others. Tom also held the world record for three chainsaw juggling (44 throws).


== See also ==
Riondel
Kootenays
Kootenay Lake
Crawford Bay Airport
Nelson, British Columbia
Creston, British Columbia


== References ==


== External links ==
East Shore Kootenay Lake Chamber of Commerce
The East Shore Mainstreet (Newspaper)
Crawford Bay Elementary-Secondary School
Starbelly Jam Festival
Artisans of Crawford Bay
Kokanee Springs Golf Resort
Food Roots - Kootenay Lake South Food Systems - Fall Fair