University of Manitoba

The University of Manitoba (U of M or UM) is a public research university in Manitoba, Canada. Its main campus is located in the Fort Garry neighbourhood of southern Winnipeg with other campuses throughout the city. Founded in 1877, it is Western Canada's first university. The university maintains a reputation as a top research-intensive post-secondary educational institution and conducts more research annually than any other university in the region.
It is the largest university both by total student enrollment and campus area in the province of Manitoba, and the 17th-largest in all of Canada. The campus boasts dozens of faculties including the first medical school in Western Canada, and hundreds of degree programs. In addition to its main campuses, the university also operates a French-language affiliate, Université de Saint-Boniface in the Saint Boniface ward of Winnipeg. UM is a member of the U15 and of Universities Canada while its global affiliations include the International Association of Universities and the Association of Commonwealth Universities. Its increased global outreach has resulted in one of the most internationally diverse student bodies in Canada, while its competitive academic and research programs have consistently ranked among the top in the Canadian Prairies.
The Manitoba Bisons represent the team in athletics as a member of U Sports and Canada West (CWUAA).
As of 2018, there have been 98 Rhodes Scholars from the University of Manitoba, more than from any other university in Western Canada.The university's alumni include recipients of the Nobel Prize, the Academy Award, the Order of Merit, and Olympic medalists, among many others. The university has produced countless government figures, including Premiers of Manitoba, Supreme Court of Canada justices, and Members of Parliament. Research at UM has produced countless contributions, including the creation of Canola oil in the 1970s.


== Location ==

The University of Manitoba has three main locations: the Bannatyne Campus, the Fort Garry Campus and the William Norrie Centre.The downtown Bannatyne campus of the university comprises a complex of ten buildings west of the Health Sciences Centre between McDermot Avenue and William Avenue in central Winnipeg. This complex houses the Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, including the Dr. Gerald Niznick College of Dentistry, the Max Rady College of Medicine, the College of Rehabilitation Sciences, and the School of Dental Hygiene. The College of Pharmacy moved from Fort Garry to the Bannatyne campus on October 16, 2008 with the opening of the 95,000 sq ft (8,800 m2) Apotex Centre. The Brodie Centre is known as the "flagship" which connects all three faculties as well as the Neil John MacLean Health Sciences Library and the Joe Doupe Fitness Centre. It is at 727 McDermot Avenue. The remaining unit of the Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, the College of Nursing, will remain on the Fort Garry campus until additional facilities can be built at Bannatyne. 
The main Fort Garry campus (on the Red River in south Winnipeg) comprises over 60 teaching and research buildings of the University and sits on 274 hectares (680 acres) of land. In addition, Smartpark is the location of seven buildings leased to research and development organizations involving university-industry partnerships. The address is 66 Chancellors Circle.
The William Norrie Centre on Selkirk Avenue is the campus for social work education for inner-city residents.
The university operates agricultural research stations near Glenlea and Carman, Manitoba. The Ian N. Morrison Research Farm near Carman is a 406 acres (164 ha) facility 70 km (43 mi) from Winnipeg, while the Glenlea facility is approximately 1,000 acres (405 ha) and is 20 km (12 mi) from Winnipeg.


== Indigenous Community ==
The University of Manitoba provides services to urban and rural Indigenous people. The University of Manitoba's Department of Native Studies is the oldest such unit in Western Canada. Many of the Indigenous Access programs include summer courses that bring new Indigenous students to campus before the start of the school year for campus orientation sessions. Indigenous Elders are present on campus at University of Manitoba to provide social supports in Migizii Agamik (Bald Eagle Lounge), the Indigenous Centre on campus. Tutoring services are available within the University of Manitoba's Medicine, Engineering (Engineering ACCESS Program [ENGAP]) and Social Work ACCESS Programs. The university connects with First Nations communities to talk to potential students at a much younger age through Curry Biz Camp, which fosters entrepreneurship among young First Nations and Métis students. On June 2, 2017, Indigenous knowledge and guidance became a formally recognized part of the Rady Faculty of Health Sciences with the creation of Ongomiizwin, the largest Indigenous education and health unit in Canada in terms of scope and mandate.


== History ==


=== Early history ===

The University of Manitoba is a non-denominational university, founded by Alexander Morris, that received a charter on February 28, 1877. It officially opened on June 20, 1877 to confer degrees on students graduating from its three founding colleges: St. Boniface College (Roman Catholic/Francophone), St John's College (Anglican) and Manitoba College (Presbyterian). The University of Manitoba granted its first degrees in 1880. The University was the first to be established in western Canada.
The university has added a number of colleges to its corporate and associative body. In 1882 the Manitoba Medical College, which had been founded by some physicians and surgeons, became a part of the University. Architect Charles Henry Wheeler designed the Bacteriological Research Building (1897), part of the Manitoba Medical College. Architect George Creeford Browne designed the Science Building, 1899–1900.Other colleges followed:

Methodist Church's Wesley College in 1888
Manitoba College of Pharmacy in 1902
Manitoba Agriculture College in 1906
St. Paul's College in 1931
Brandon College in 1938
St. Andrew's College in 1946In 1901 the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba changed the University Act so the university could do its own teaching, and in 1905 a building in downtown Winnipeg became its first teaching facility with a staff of six science professors. The governance was modeled on the provincial University of Toronto Act of 1906 which established a bicameral system of university government consisting of a senate (faculty), responsible for academic policy, and a board of governors (citizens) exercising exclusive control over financial policy and having formal authority in all other matters. The president, appointed by the board, was to provide a link between the two bodies and to perform institutional leadership.In the early part of the 20th century, professional education expanded beyond the traditional fields of theology, law and medicine. Graduate training based on the German-inspired American model of specialized course work and the completion of a research thesis was introduced.The Manitoba Medical Alumni Association erected the Medical Corps Memorial, which is dedicated to the memory of the graduates and students of the University of Manitoba Medical College, who laid down their lives during the North West Rebellion (1 name); 1900 South African War (1 name) and 1914–1918 The Great War (7 names).The first school of architecture in western Canada was founded in 1919 at the University of Manitoba.By 1920, the university was the largest university in the Canadian Prairies and the fifth largest in Canada. It had eight faculties: Arts, Science, Law, Medicine, Engineering, Architecture, Pharmacy, and Agriculture. It had 1,654 male students and 359 female students, and 184 academic staff, including 6 women.The Faculty of Law was an affiliated college, the Manitoba Law School, which was founded by the university and the Law Society of Manitoba in 1914. In 1920 it had 123 students, including 5 women, and 21 academic staff. It became a full part of the university in 1966.The university was originally on Broadway. In 1929, following the addition of more programs, schools, and faculties, the university moved to its permanent site in Fort Garry, Manitoba. The university maintained the Broadway facilities for many years.The university established an Evening institute in 1936.
St. Andrew's College, which originally trained the ministry for the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada, became an affiliated College in 1981. St. Andrew's College was the first Ukrainian-language college opened by the Orthodox Church in North America. It is home to a large Ukrainian cultural and religious library.
The policy of university education initiated in the 1960s responded to population pressure. In 1967, two of the colleges that had been part of the University of Manitoba were given university status by the provincial government. United College, which had been formed by the merging of Wesley College and Manitoba College, became the University of Winnipeg, and Brandon College became Brandon University.
St. Boniface College and St. John's College, two of the founding colleges of the University, are still part of the University of Manitoba. St. Boniface College is the University's only French language college; it offers instruction in French and facilities for the training of teachers who expect to teach in the French language. St. John's College, which dates back to 1820, offers instruction in Arts and Science and, among other special programs, prepares men and women for the ordained ministry of the Anglican Church.


=== Present ===

Thirty-three of the buildings on the Fort Garry campus of the University of Manitoba are used for teaching. Four of these are colleges: St. John's College, St. Paul's College, St. Andrew's College, and University College. The remaining buildings contain laboratories, administrative and service offices, residences, or are the property of research agencies.
The university has approximately 27,000 students – 24,000 undergraduate and 3,000 graduate. It offers more than 90 degrees, and more than 60 at the undergraduate level. Most academic units offer graduate studies programs leading to master's or doctoral degrees.
In 2007–08, the university acquired more than $150 million in research income. The university holds 48 Canada Research Chairs and is home to or a partner in 37 research centres, institutes and shared facilities. These centres foster collaborative research and scholarship.
The University of Manitoba is the network leader of ISIS Canada (Intelligent Sensing for Innovative Structures), headquartered in the Faculty of Engineering. ISIS Canada is a National Network of Centres of Excellence (NCE) developing better ways to build, repair and monitor civil structures. The university is a member of 13 other NCEs.
The Centre for Defence and Security Studies at the University of Manitoba has a research, teaching and outreach program designed to advance knowledge, understanding and debate in Canada on defence and security issues.


== Legacy ==
On 28 February 2002, Canada Post issued 'University of Manitoba, 1877–2002' as part of the Canadian Universities series. The stamp was based on a design by Steven Slipp, based on photographs by Mike Grandmaison and on an illustration by Bonnie Ross. The 48¢ stamps are perforated 13.5 and were printed by Ashton-Potter Canada Limited.


== Campus ==
In 2013, the University of Manitoba sponsored an urban planning design competition to plan an extension to the Fort Garry Campus. The goal is to improve the general campus experience and guide future growth of parking citation revenue by establishing an urban framework for housing, university buildings and the associated public transportation in the area. The winning design submission was from Janet Rosenberg & Studio Inc. (Toronto) and Cibinel Architects Ltd. (Winnipeg) with Landmark Planning & Design Inc. (Winnipeg) and ARUP Canada Inc. (Toronto).


== Academics ==
The university has a total enrollment of approximately 26,000 students in 24 faculties. Most academic units offer graduate studies programs leading to master's or doctoral degrees. The University of Manitoba ranked 14th in Maclean's Medical/Doctoral university category, tied with the University of Saskatchewan. The Medical/Doctoral category ranks Canadian universities that are research-intensive.There are five colleges under the University of Manitoba banner. They are the Université de Saint-Boniface (University of St. Boniface), St. John's College, St. Paul's College, St. Andrew's College and University College. Within these colleges are multiple faculties. The University of St. Boniface teaches their courses in French. 
The university's faculties include the following programs:

Agricultural and Food Sciences
Clayton H. Riddell Faculty of Environment, Earth, and Resources
College of Nursing
College of Pharmacy
College of Rehabilitation Sciences
Dr. Gerald Niznick College of Dentistry
Division of Extended Education
Faculty of Architecture
Faculty of Education
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Graduate Studies
Faculty of Kinesiology & Recreation Management
Faculty of Science
Faculty of Social Work
Faculty of Human Ecology
I. H. Asper School of Business
Marcel A. Desautels Faculty of Music
Max Rady College of Medicine
Rady Faculty of Health Sciences
Robson Hall – Faculty of Law
School of Agriculture
School of Art
School of Dental Hygiene
University 1


== Museums, libraries and archives ==
The Anthropology Laboratory Museum at UofM collects, inventories and displays artifacts including cartographic materials, prints, drawings, and textual records from the Manitoba Region. The Human History collection includes archaeological and ceremonial objects, and weapons. The Natural Sciences artifacts include biological, zooarchaeological, aquatic, Earth Science, Geological and Paleontological Collections.
The University of Manitoba Libraries includes:

Albert D. Cohen Management Library
Architecture/Fine Arts Library
Archives & Special Collections, includes the Rare Book Room
Donald W. Craik Engineering Library
Eckhardt Gramatté Music Library
E.K. Williams Law Library
Eckhardt Gramatté Music Library
Elizabeth Dafoe Library
Faculty of Medicine Archives, includes the Ross Mitchell Rare Book Room
Father Harold Drake Library (St. Paul's College)
Neil John Maclean Health Sciences Library
Sciences and Technology Library
St. John's College Library
William R. Newman Library
WRHA Virtual Library


=== Art galleries ===
The main art gallery on campus is "School of Art Gallery".


==== Other art galleries ====
Arch II, Faculty of Architecture
Dr. Paul H. T. Thorlakson Gallery, Icelandic Collection, Elizabeth Dafoe Library
Gallery of Student Art (GOSA), University Centre


== Human resources ==
The academic staff are represented by two unions. The professors are represented by the University of Manitoba Faculty Association, while sessional instructors and teaching assistants are represented by the CUPE Local 3909. Professors at the Faculty of Dentistry are represented by the University of Manitoba Dental Clinical Staff Association.The support staff are divided among many unions. The support staff and the campus security are represented by the AESES, though the support staff at the Faculty of the Engineering are represented by CUPE Local 1482. All of the outside workers are represented by the CAW Local 3007.


== University administration ==


=== University presidents ===
James Alexander MacLean (1913–1934)
Sidney Earle Smith (1934–1944)
Henry Percy Armes, acting (1944–1945)
Albert William Trueman (1945–1948)
Albert Henry S. Gillson (1948–1954)
Hugh Hamilton Saunderson (1954–1970)
Ernest Sirluck (1970–1976)
Ralph Campbell (1976–1981)
Arnold Naimark (1981–1996)
Emőke J. E. Szathmáry (1996–2008)
David Barnard (2008–present)


=== University chancellors ===

S. P. Matheson (1908–1934)
John W. Dafoe (1934–1944)
Andrew Knox Dysart (1944–1952)
Victor Sifton (1952–1959)
Justice S. Freedman (1959–1968)
Peter D. Curry (1968–1974)
Richard S. Bowles (1974–1977)
Isabel G. Auld (1977–1986)
Henry E. Duckworth (1986–1992)
Arthur Mauro (1992–2001)
Bill Norrie (2001–2010)
Harvey Secter (2010–2019)
Anne Mahon (2019-Present)


== Notable past and present instructors ==
Reg Alcock, former President of the Treasury Board of Liberal Prime Minister Paul Martin's cabinet
Robert Archambeau ceramic artist, Governor General's Award winner
Arthur Henry Reginald Buller F.R.S.C., FRS, mycologist
Patricia Churchland and Paul Churchland, former Professors of philosophy, known for the school of eliminative materialism
Jean Friesen, former Deputy Premier and Minister of Intergovernment Affairs of New Democratic Premier Gary Doer's cabinet
Aniruddha M. Gole, IEEE Fellow
Frank Hawthorne F.R.S.C., mineral sciences professor
Larry Hurtado, Professor of Early Christianity and New Testament Languages (1975-1996), Founding Director of the Institute of the Humanities (1990-1992)
Guy Maddin, film director and former Professor
Nathan Mendelsohn, Professor of mathematics
Zalman Schachter-Shalomi, major founder of the Jewish Renewal Movement
Arthur Schafer, director of the Centre for Professional and Applied Ethics and prominent ethicist
Carol Shields, Pulitzer Prize-winning author
Vaclav Smil, energy systems scientist and policy analyst
Peter St John, 9th Earl of Orkney, formerly Professor of Political Studies, now a senior scholar
Fernando de Toro, professor and dean
H. C. Wolfart, professor of linguistics


== Notable alumni ==


=== Rhodes Scholars ===
As of 2010, there have been 96 Rhodes Scholars from the University of Manitoba, more than from any other university in Western Canada.


== Relations ==
Robert Kroetsch, poet and novelist.


== Athletics ==
The university is represented in U Sports by the Manitoba Bisons.Athletic facilities on campus include the Max Bell Centre, the Investor's Group Athletic Centre, and Investor's Group Field, which opened in 2013 to replace University Stadium.


== Recreation ==
The University of Manitoba offers recreational programs year-round, including a swimming program, adult classes and summer programs for children. The university's Frank Kennedy Centre, Max Bell Centre, and Investor's Group Athletic Centre contain indoor tracks, a swimming pool, work-out facilities, and an international ice hockey rink, as well as basketball, volleyball, squash and raquetball courts. Frank Kennedy Centre also hosts dance, combat and gymnastics rooms, and indoor tennis courts.


== Student life ==


=== Student representation ===
The students at the university are members of the University of Manitoba Students' Union (UMSU). UMSU represents students at the Board of Governors and Senate, as well as providing programs and support to students. The University of Manitoba Graduate Students' Association (UMGSA) also represents over 3,000 graduate students at the University of Manitoba. The UMGSA is guided by its vision, goals and governing documents, all of which focus on promoting and providing graduate student advocacy, offering services and support to students, as well as developing and encouraging involvement in the graduate student community.


=== Greek organizations ===
The National Panhellenic Conference sororities on campus are Alpha Delta Pi, Alpha Gamma Delta, and Alpha Phi. Fraternities on campus include Delta Upsilon, Delta Kappa Epsilon, and Phi Delta Theta. Fraternity Rush and Sorority Recruitment occur during the first weeks of school in September.


=== Music ===
Students can participate in the University of Manitoba Orchestra.


== See also ==
Asper School of Business
University of Manitoba Students' Union
Faculty of Medicine – University of Manitoba
Robert B. Ferguson Museum of Mineralogy
Ed Leith Cretaceous Menagerie
List of agricultural universities and colleges
List of universities in Manitoba
Higher education in Manitoba
Education in Canada


== References ==

"Notes & Numbers". Public Affairs, University of Manitoba. Archived from the original on 2009-06-05.


=== Histories of the university ===
John M (Jack) Bumsted 'The University of Manitoba: An Illustrated History (Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press © 2001)'
W. J. Frazer "A History of St. John's College, Winnipeg." M.A. thesis, University of Manitoba, 1966.
Mary Kinnear "Disappointment in Discourse: Women University Professors at the University of Manitoba before 1970." Historical Studies in Education 4, no. 2 (Fall 1992).
P.R. Régnier "A History of St. Boniface College." M.A. thesis, University of Manitoba, 1964.
Hippocrates on the Red: the History of the Manitoba Medical School


== External links ==
Official website
University of Manitoba Athletics website