Capital Health Regional Medical Center

Capital Health Regional Medical Center is a member of Capital Health System. Located in Trenton, New Jersey, Capital Health Regional Medical Center, is a regional academic medical center and state designated trauma center that cares for both complex and routine cases.
The William McKinley Memorial Hospital was the outgrowth of a movement to establish a homeopathic dispensary. On March 10, 1887, a meeting of doctors interested was held at 6 North Stockton Street, at the home of Mr. Wilson Pierson, attended by the following: Drs. F. H. Williams, James R. Cooper, Eugene B. Witte, William T. Rogers, William G. McCullough and William H. Griffith.
In 1889 parcels of land on Brunswick Avenue were purchased, composing approximately six acres. The old farm property upon which the house stood, known as the "Thomas B. DeCou property," was used as the first hospital and was named "The City Hospital."
In 1900 the directors, consisting of Drs. F. H. Williams. W. G. McCullough, James Rudolph Cooper, W. T. Rogers, E. B. Witte and W. H Griffith, started to erect a new brick hospital which, when completed September 1902, was renamed and reincorporated as "The William McKinley Memorial Hospital."
The hospital proving too small for the growing needs, in 1924 it was determined to add a new wing and a public campaign and drive was started for $200,000 to build it. This was successful and the new building was opened to the public October 1, 1925. The cost was over $250,000.
In 1919 a new nurses' home was built on the northwestern corner of the hospital property. This was made possible by $50,000 received by bequest from Henry C. Kelsey. The training school was the first of its kind in the city of Trenton, and since its incorporation it 1899 has graduated 135 nurses.
Capital Health operates two hospitals, Capital Health Regional Medical Center in Trenton and Capital Health Medical Center in Hopewell, an outpatient facility in Hamilton, and various primary and specialty care practices across the region.  Capital Health is accredited by The Joint Commission.
Capital Health serves as a Level II regional trauma center, regional perinatal center (including a Level III NICU), and emergency mental health screening center.


== See also ==
St. Francis Medical Center (Trenton, New Jersey)


== References ==