A Aa E Ee (2009 Tamil film)

A Aa E Ee is a 2009 Indian Tamil-language film that stars Navdeep, Aravind Akash, Monica and Saranya Mohan in the lead roles, whilst, supporting actors Prabhu, Cochin Haneefa, Livingston, Manorama and Ganja Karuppu play other prominent roles. Directed by Sabapathy Dekshinamurthy, and produced by the oldest Tamil film production company, AVM Productions, the film released on 9 January 2009. The film is a remake of Telugu hit Chandamama with Navdeep enacting the same role. The film received positive reviews from critics.


== Plot ==
Subramaniam (Prabhu), an ayurvedic physician, is a much-respected man in his village. His only daughter Anitha (Monica) returns home from Chennai after completing a course in fashion designing. Having lost her mother at a very young age, Anitha is close to her father, and they share a special bond. Soon, Anitha’s marriage is fixed with Elango (Aravind Akash), the son of Vedachalam (Cochin Haneefa). While Vedachalam is a good-for-nothing chap, Elango is a perfect match. Elango falls in love with Anitha, but she tells him of her past: her lover Akash (Navdeep), who had jilted her after a one-night stand. Elango, though shattered, meets Akash and tries to unite him with Anitha. In this attempt, he finds himself falling in love with Anitha’s cousin Eeswari (Saranya Mohan). Now the story is about uniting the two pairs of lovers. Anitha does not want to hurt her father with the knowledge of her past.


== Cast ==
Prabhu as Subramaniam
Navdeep as Akash
Aravind Akash as Elango
Monica as Anitha
Saranya Mohan as Eeswari
Cochin Haneefa as Vedachalam
Livingston
Manorama
Ganja Karuppu
Sathyan
Bonda Mani


== Soundtrack ==
Soundtrack was composed by Vijay Antony and lyrics by Eknath, Priyan and Annamalai.
"A Aa E Ee" - Rahul Nambiar, Dinesh
"Dingi Tappu" - Megha, Sheeba, Vinaya, Maya, Ramya, Vijay Antony
"Kanni Vedi" - Sangeetha Rajeshwaran, Vijay Antony
"Mena Minuki" - Vijay Antony, Suchitra, Surmukhi Raman, Sangeetha Rajeshwaran
"Natta Nada" - Sangeetha Rajeshwaran, Karthik, Christopher
"Tappo Tappo" - Bakshi, Sulabha


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
A Aa E Ee at Paadal.com