Edward Henry Howard

Edward Henry Howard (13 February 1829 – 16 September 1892) was an English Catholic priest and archbishop, who was made a cardinal in 1877. He was a relative of the Dukes of Norfolk.


== Biography ==
He was the son of Edward Charles Howard of Glossop, and received his primary education at Oscott. After a short stint of service as an officer with the Life Guards (British Army) during which he commanded the detachment escorting the hearse at the Duke of Wellington's funeral in 1852, he resigned his commission to study for the priesthood at the Academy of Ecclesiastical Nobles in Rome, and was ordained a priest in 1855. He served as a missionary in Goa, India. After his return to Rome, he continued to work with Englishmen who wished to convert from Anglicanism to the Catholic Church. He was made Archbishop of Neocaesaria in partibus and assistant bishop to the Cardinal Bishop of Frascati in June 1871.
He was promoted to Cardinal-Priest of Ss. Giovanni e Paolo on 12 March 1877 and appointed Protector of the English College at Rome, an institution to which he later left his valuable library. For about a year, he was papal envoy to Goa, India, to negotiate between the British and the Portuguese authorities the settlement of the problems concerning the ecclesiastical government of the Province of Goa. He wanted to become a missionary in the East but the Pope Pius IX insisted that he stay in Rome. He served in pastoral ministry in Rome as confessor of the poor and the soldiers. In December 1881 he became Archpriest of Saint Peter's Basilica. On 24 March 1884 he became Cardinal-Bishop of the suburbicarian diocese of Frascati.
In failing health, he retired to Brighton shortly before his death, which occurred on 16 September 1892.  He is buried at the Fitzalan Chapel in Arundel, West Sussex.


== Honours ==
 Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Order of Kalākaua I, 1881


== References ==


== External links ==
Dudley Baxter, England's Cardinals pages 82–85
New Zealand Tablet, The New English Cardinal
John Martin Robinson, The Duke of Norfolk, A Quincentennial History