John Foreman (musician)

John Gregory Foreman OAM (born 24 April 1972) is an Australian musician and television personality. In 1992, he joined the Network Ten team for Good Morning Australia with Bert Newton, serving as Music Director until retiring in 2004. During 2003–2008 he was Musical Director of Australian Idol.Foreman hails from Newcastle, New South Wales, and studied at the Sydney Conservatorium of Music.


== Compositions and albums ==
In 2000, Foreman wrote the Olympic Flame song, The Flame, performed by Tina Arena for the 2000 Summer Olympics Opening Ceremony.He wrote Light The Way for the 2006 Opening Ceremony of the Asian Games in Doha, performed by Jose Carreras and Majida El Roumi, and Melbourne Girl, performed by Vanessa Amorosi at the Closing Ceremony of the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, UK.In 2004, John produced, orchestrated and conducted Anthony Callea's recording of The Prayer, which received an ARIA Award for the highest selling single by an Australia artist.John has produced albums and/or singles for Marcia Hines, Silvie Paladino, Guy Sebastian, Ricki-Lee Coulter, Carl Riseley and Greta Bradman.
In 2013, he produced Anthony Callea's Christmas album This Is Christmas.Foreman released No Jivin' in 1993 on the BMG label which received an ARIA Award nomination for Best Jazz Album.
Foreman wrote the background music for Chris Lilley's television shows, Ja'mie: Private School Girl and Jonah from Tonga.


== Other television work ==
In December 2005 Foreman began hosting The Big Night In with John Foreman. The premiere episode featured an interview with actor Russell Crowe, as well as interviews with vocalists Deborah Conway and Tina Cousins.
Foreman is the Musical Director for Melbourne's Christmas Eve Carols by Candlelight, at the Sidney Myer Music Bowl, since 2003. and is Musical Director for the TV Week Logie Awards. In 2008 he appeared alongside Ian Dickson, Cosima De Vito and Guy Sebastian to pay tribute to Shannon Noll on This Is Your Life.In February 2012 he joined the reboot of Young Talent Time as the Musical Director.
John was musical director for Oprah Winfrey's telecast from the steps of the Sydney Opera House, which featured Hugh Jackman, Nicole Kidman, Olivia Newton-John, Russell Crowe and Keith Urban performing a one-time-only rendition of I Still Call Australia Home with John and his orchestra.Foreman hosts the annual Schools Spectacular which airs on the Seven Network (previously on Nine).


== Live performances ==
Foreman conducted the Australian Philharmonic Orchestra for their Not New Year's Eve Concert at the Sydney Opera House and their New Year's Eve Concert at Hamer Hall in Melbourne in 2012, 2013 and 2014.He performed as a jazz artist at the Montréal International Jazz Festival in 1995 and the Santa Barbara International Jazz Festival in 1998 and 1999.Foreman has been musical director for theatre shows for The Production Company, including The Boy From Oz, Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, Hello, Dolly! and Anything Goes.


== Creative director and television producer ==
Foreman was Creative Director for Australia Day in Sydney 2015, and continues in the role for 2016 and 2017. An evening concert on the steps of the Sydney Opera House on Australia Day 2015 featured Jessica Mauboy, Guy Sebastian, Sheppard, The Veronicas, Russell Morris and James Morrison.
He was Creative Director for the Opening Ceremony of the 2013 Asia Pacific Special Olympics Opening Ceremony in Newcastle, which featured Human Nature, Marcia Hines, Doug Parkinson, The McClymonts and local Newcastle performers.Together with manager Richard Macionis, Foreman was Executive Producer of the Network Ten special, John Foreman Presents Burt Bacharach in 2007.


== Other roles ==
Ambassador, the Australian Institute of Music (AIM).
Ambassador, Music: Count Us In 
Ambassador, Special Olympics Australia.
Board Member, Talent Development Project (TDP).


== Bibliography ==
Foreman, John (2005). Your Guide to Unlocking the Australian Music Industry : A Definitive Guide to Getting Started and Succeeding in One of Australia's Toughest Industries. South Oakleigh, Vic: Funtastic. ISBN 978-1-74167-016-5.


== References ==