Institute of Buddhist Studies

The Institute of Buddhist Studies is a Jodo Shinshu-affiliated seminary and graduate school, located in Berkeley, California. It is an affiliate member of the Graduate Theological Union, also located in Berkeley. Its primary mission is to train Jodo Shinshu ministers for service in temples in the United States through the Buddhist Churches of America, the U.S. mainland branch district of the Nishi Hongwanji sect of Japanese Buddhism. The school also accepts graduate students pursuing Master of Arts degrees in general Buddhist Studies. In addition, the school has a chaplaincy training program and has partnered with Sati Center in California to train Buddhist chaplains.
The Institute of Buddhist Studies originally began as a study group for nisei ("second generation") Japanese-Americans interested in Jodo Shinshu Buddhism during the 1950s. Its original location was at the Berkeley Buddhist Temple, then later relocated to its present location on Durant Street. 


== Degree Programs ==
The Institute of Buddhist Studies offers three graduate degree programs:

Master of Arts (M.A.) with a concentration in Buddhist Studies jointly offered with the Graduate Theological Union
Master of Buddhist Studies (M.B.S.)
Master of Divinity (M.Div.)


== Certificate Programs ==
The Institute of Buddhist Studies also offers five certificate programs which may be completed concurrently within a degree program to focus one’s studies and certify competence in a particular field of study, or may be completed as stand-alone programs:

Certificate in Shin Buddhist Studies
Certificate in Sōtō Zen Buddhist Studies
Certificate in Theravada Buddhist Studies
Certificate in Buddhist Chaplaincy
Certificate in Buddhism and Contemporary Psychology


== Publications ==
The Institute of Buddhist Studies publishes an academic journal, the Pacific World, and has partnered with several other organizations to produce journals and book series:

Pacific World: Journal of Institute of Buddhist Studies
Contemporary Issues in Buddhist Studies book series
Pure Land Buddhist Studies book series
The Pure Land: Journal of the International Association of Shin Buddhist Studies
The Buddhist Forum
The Journal of Buddhist Literature
IBS Monograph Series
Publications of the Center for Contemporary Shin Buddhist Studies


== External links ==
Institute of Buddhist Studies