Badarpur railway station

Badarpur railway station serves the Indian city of Badarpur in Assam. It belongs to Lumding railway division of North East Frontier Railway of India. It is located at Karimganj District in the state of Assam. It is one of the oldest station of India built in 1898. The Station connects Badarpur to other regions of Barak Valley as well as  many parts of India.


== History ==
Assam Bengal Railway was incorporated in 1892 to serve British-owned tea plantations in Assam. The railway line from Chittagong to Badarpur was opened to traffic in 1898. In 1942 the management of Assam Bengal Railway was transferred to the Govt of India. It was  amalgamated with the state managed Eastern Bengal Railway and designated as Bengal Assam Railway .On 1 January 1942 the Assam Bengal Railway combined with the Eastern Bengal Railway to form the Bengal and Assam Railway. At time of the independence of India in 1947, Bengal-Assam Railway was split up and the portion of the system, about 2,603.92 km long which fell within the boundary of erstwhile East Pakistan was named as Eastern Bengal Railway, the control remaining with the central Government of Pakistan. Later, with the effect from 1 February 1961, Eastern Bengal Railway was renamed as Pakistan Railway.


== Successors ==
With the partition of India in 1947, portions of the Bengal Assam Railway which lay in Assam and the Indian part of North Bengal became Assam Railway. North Eastern Railway  was formed in 1952 by amalgamating Assam Railway  with Oudh Tirhut Railway  and Fatehgarh district of Bombay, Baroda and Central India Railway.  Northeast Fronter Railway was carved out of North Eastern Railway in 1958.The portion of the system which fell within the boundary of erstwhile East Pakistan was named as Eastern Bengal Railway. On 1 February 1961, Eastern Bengal Railway was renamed as Pakistan Railway and in 1962 it became Pakistan Eastern Railway . With the emergence of Bangladesh, it became Bangladesh Railway.After the independence of Pakistan on 15 August 1947 the broad-gauge portion of the Bengal-Assam Railway, lying in India was added to the East Indian Railway and the metre-gauge portion became the Assam Railway, with its headquarters at Pandu. On 14 April 1952, the 2857 km long Assam Railway and the Oudh and Tirhut Railway were amalgamated to form one of the six newly carved zones of the Indian Railways: the North Eastern Railway (India). On the same day, the reorganized Sealdah division of the erstwhile Bengal Assam Railway (which was added to the East Indian Railway earlier) was amalgamated with the Eastern Railway.


== Major trains ==
Agartala - Anand Vihar Terminal Rajdhani Express
Guwahati – Silchar Express
Kanchenjunga Express
Tripura Sundari Express
Silchar - New Delhi Poorvottar Sampark Kranti Express
Bangalore Cantonment - Agartala Humsafar Express
Thiruvananthapuram - Silchar Superfast Express
Barak Brahmaputra Express
Deoghar - Agartala Weekly Express
Agartala - Silchar Passenger
Silchar - Dharmanagar Passenger
Dullavcherra–Silchar Fast Passenger
Badarpur - Dullabcherra Passenger


== Gallery ==


== References ==