United Concordia Companies, Inc.

United Concordia is a dental insurance company headquartered in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, United States. It is one of the largest dental insurers in the United States. The company currently insures more than 8.9 million members worldwide. The corporation also operates regional offices covering the rest of the United States in Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Michigan, New York, California, Washington, Oregon, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Texas.


== Company history ==
United Concordia Companies, Inc. (“UCCI”) was originally a part of Pennsylvania Blue Shield.  The company was established as a wholly owned subsidiary of Highmark in 1992.  Over time, United Concordia acquired, and today operates, eleven subsidiary companies licensed to transact health insurance and/or dental managed care in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam and Puerto Rico.  United Concordia also maintains third party administrator licenses and utilization review agent certifications in a number of states.  These licenses support United Concordia's fully insured group and individual dental products and permit it to administer dental benefits for self-funded employers, as well as a number of federal government contracts.


== Provider Networks ==
United Concordia operates several dental provider networks, the largest of which has more than 127,000 participating dentists at over 410,000 access points.


== Government Business ==
United Concordia has administered dental benefits for active duty service members (ADSMs) and their families since 1996 through the Department of Defense's (DoD) TRICARE Active Duty Dental Program (ADDP) and TRICARE Dental Program (TDP). 
In 2008, United Concordia was also selected by the DoD to administer the ADDP. This program provides private sector dental care to ensure dental health and deployment readiness for 1.4 million eligible ADSMs. 
In 2016, United Concordia was selected by the DoD to administer the TDP.  This program provides dental benefits for over 1.8 million  active duty family members, as well as National Guard and Reserve members and their families.
United Concordia has also been a dental carrier for the Federal Employees Dental and Vision Program (FEDVIP) contract since 2006. FEDVIP is a dental and vision insurance plan available to Federal employees, retirees and their dependents along with eligible retired service members.


== Commercial Business ==
United Concordia provides dental insurance benefits to over 26,000 companies, state and local governments, unions and associations, including many of the top 100 Fortune® 500 companies.


== Philanthropy ==
United Concordia Dental is committed to improving the oral and overall health of the people in our communities. In 2018, our dental clinic sponsorships helped to provide nearly 19,300 underserved individuals with over $14 million in free dental care. We also support the next generation of students pursuing degrees in the dental field. In 2018, United Concordia provided scholarships to 15 aspiring dental and dental hygiene students to help defray the costs of their educations.