Cabinet Office

The Cabinet Office is a department of the Government of the United Kingdom responsible for supporting the Prime Minister and Cabinet of the United Kingdom. It is composed of various units that support Cabinet committees and which co-ordinate the delivery of government objectives via other departments. It currently has just over 2,000 staff, most of whom work in Whitehall. Staff working in the Prime Minister's Office are part of the Cabinet Office.


== Responsibilities ==
The Cabinet Office's core functions are:
Supporting the Prime Minister to define and deliver the Government's objectives, implement political and constitutional reform, and drive forward from the centre particular cross-departmental priority issues such as public service improvement, social exclusion and the third sector;
Supporting the Cabinet – to drive the coherence, quality and delivery of policy and operations across departments; and
Strengthening the civil service – to ensure the civil service is organised effectively and efficiently and has the capability in terms of skills, values and leadership to deliver the Government's objectives, including ensuring value for money to the taxpayer. This also includes working with the Treasury to drive efficiency and reform across the public sector.Other functions include oversight of the Crown Commercial Service and the accreditation of Social Impact Contractors.
The Cabinet Office has responsibility for the following at a UK national level:

political and constitutional reform
the Home Civil Service
the Boundary Commissions
the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority
the Government Commercial Function  and the Government Commercial Organisation.


=== Devolved nations ===
Its main counterparts in the devolved nations are as follows:
Scotland

Office of the First Minister (supporting the Scottish Government cabinet)Northern Ireland 
Office of the First Minister and deputy First Minister (co-ordinating the Northern Ireland Executive)
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Investment (social enterprise)
Department of Finance and Personnel (the Northern Ireland Civil Service)
Department for Social Development (civil society)Wales


== History ==
The department was formed in December 1916 from the secretariat of the Committee of Imperial Defence under Sir Maurice Hankey, the first Cabinet Secretary.
Traditionally the most important part of the Cabinet Office's role was facilitating collective decision-making by the Cabinet, through running and supporting Cabinet-level committees. This is still its principal role, but since the absorption of some of the functions of the Civil Service Department in 1981 the Cabinet Office has also helped to ensure that a wide range of Ministerial priorities are taken forward across Whitehall.
It also contains miscellaneous units that do not sit well in other departments. For example:

The Historical Section was founded in 1906 as part of the Committee for Imperial Defence and is concerned with Official Histories.
The Joint Intelligence Committee was founded in 1936 and transferred to the department in 1957. It deals with intelligence assessments and directing the national intelligence organisations of the UK.
The Ceremonial Branch was founded in 1937 and transferred to the department in 1981. It was originally concerned with all ceremonial functions of state, but today it handles honours and appointments.In modern times the Cabinet Office often takes on responsibility for areas of policy which are the priority of the Government of the time. The units that administer these areas migrate in and out of the Cabinet Office as government priorities (and governments) change.


== Ministers ==
The Cabinet Office Ministers are as follows:
The Cabinet Secretary and Head of the Home Civil Service is Sir Mark Sedwill; the Permanent Secretary and Chief Executive of the Home Civil Service is John Manzoni.
The Cabinet Office also supports the work of:

the Leader of the House of Commons;
the Leader of the House of Lords; and
the Whips Office.


== Committees ==

Cabinet committees have two key purposes:
To relieve the burden on the Cabinet by dealing with business that does not need to be discussed at full Cabinet. Appeals to the Cabinet should be infrequent, and Ministers chairing Cabinet Committees should exercise discretion in advising the Prime Minister whether to allow them.
To support the principle of collective responsibility by ensuring that, even though a question may never reach the Cabinet itself, it will be fully considered. In this way, the final judgement is sufficiently authoritative that Government as a whole can be expected to accept responsibility for it. In this sense, Cabinet Committee decisions have the same authority as Cabinet decisions.


== Buildings ==

The main building of the Cabinet Office is at 70 Whitehall, adjacent to Downing Street. The building connects three historically distinct properties, as well as the remains of Henry VIII's 1530 tennis courts, part of the Palace of Whitehall, which can be seen within the building. The Whitehall frontage was designed by Sir John Soane and completed by Sir Charles Barry between 1845 and 1847 as the Treasury Buildings. Immediately to the west Dorset House (1700) connects the front of the building to William Kent's Treasury (1733–36), which faces out onto Horse Guards Parade. The latter is built over the site of the Cockpit, used for cock fighting in the Tudor period, and subsequently as a theatre. In the early 1960s the buildings were restored and many of the Tudor remains were exposed and repaired. Significant renovations between 2010 and 2016 converted many of the floors to open plan and created new office space. The Cabinet Office Briefing Rooms are located on this site.
The department occupies other buildings in Whitehall and the surrounding area, including part of 1 Horse Guards, as well as sites in other parts of the country.


== See also ==
British Civil Service
United Kingdom budget
Prime Minister's Strategy Unit
Social Exclusion Task Force
Cabinet Office Briefing Rooms
Public Sector Internal Identity Federation


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Cabinet Office official Twitter feed