Cabinet Office (Japan)

The Cabinet Office (内閣府, Naikaku-fu), abbreviated CAO, is an administrative agency of the Cabinet of Japan. It is responsible for handling the day-to-day affairs of the Cabinet. The Cabinet Office is formally headed by the Prime Minister. It focuses on specific and crucial issues faced by the cabinet, including economic and fiscal policy, science and technology policy, disaster mangagement, Okinawa and Northern Territories affairs, etc. Additionally, it controls a number of child agencies and commissions
There are usually three State Ministers (fuku-daijin) and three Parliamentary Vice-Ministers (daijin seimukan) in the Cabinet Office.


== Current Ministers of the Cabinet Office ==


== Establishment ==
Established on January 6, 2001 with the aim of assisting in the planning and overall coordination of government policies led by the Cabinet (including the Cabinet Secretariat) following the reorganization of the central government. . It is different from other ministries and agencies in that it is installed in the Cabinet and has several Ministers of State called Minister for Special Missions.
Initially, it was questioned as "it is not appropriate to use the name" Cabinet Office "because it is an organization that divides and manages administrative affairs and not the cabinet itself." [4]
The National Administrative Organization Law does not apply, and all necessary items [Note 1] are stipulated in the Cabinet Office Establishment Law. Since many important policy issues require cross-ministerial responses, many operations have been concentrated since the establishment of the Cabinet Office. While it has increased its presence, such as the jurisdiction of the certified children's garden system, it has also been pointed out that its enlargement [5]. The minister in charge of extraordinary missions, which was six at the beginning of the Cabinet Office, also has nine as of April 2019 [6]. In the 3rd Abe Cabinet, as a review of the work, the “Act for Partial Revision of the National Administrative Organization Act, etc. for Strengthening Functions Related to Comprehensive Coordination, etc. of the Important Policy of the Cabinet” was enacted, and future work to each ministry Transfer, etc. were established.


== Jurisdiction ==
The Cabinet Office's function is to help the Cabinet work on important policy and streamline critical issues facing Japan into the future. Its responsibilities extend to:

The Imperial Family, honorary and official systems,
Promotion of the formation of a gender-equal society
Civil Activities
Promotion and development of Okinawa and the northern territories
Protection of the public from disasters
Promotion of fair and free competition between businesses
Ensuring national security
Identifying specific individuals in administrative procedures
Ensuring the proper handling of numbers, etc.
Ensuring appropriate functions of finance
Promoting measures for the realization of a society where consumers can live in a safe and secure consumer lifeAs such, the Cabinet office is responsible for a number of agencies and internal ministries and administrations through which these responsibilies are spread.


=== Child Agencies ===
National Public Safety Commission
National Police Agency
Consumer Affairs Agency
Financial Services Agency
Fair Trade Commission
Food Safety Commission
Imperial Household Agency


=== Internal Ministries ===
Ministry for Science and Technology Policy
Ministry for Space Policy
Social Security and Tax Number System
Gender Equality Bureau
Okinawa and Northern Territories Affairs Administration
Measures for Declining Birthrate
Ocean Policy
"Cool Japan" Strategy
Intellectual Property Strategy
Regional Revitalization Program
Ministry for Regulatory Reform
Ministry for the Nuclear Damage Compensation and Decommissioning Facilitation Corporation
Ministry for Economic and Fiscal Policy
Ministry for Disaster Management
Ministry for Nuclear Emergency PreparednessExternal links

Cabinet Office
Full outline and structure


== References ==