Black Order (comics)

The Black Order is a fictional supervillain team appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.
The Black Order appeared in the Marvel Cinematic Universe films Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and Avengers: Endgame (2019). They were also known as the Children of Thanos.


== Fictional team biography ==


=== Thanos' version ===
The Black Order is a group of ruthless aliens that serve Thanos. They help Thanos raze worlds from which they demand tribute. When Corvus Glaive sent one of their Outriders to find a new world to raze, the Outrider targeted Earth.The Black Order arrive on Earth in search of the Infinity Gems, which are under the control of the Illuminati. Each member of the Order targets a member of the Illuminati with varying degrees of success. During their search for the gems, Ebony Maw finds Thanos' son, Thane, whom Thanos wishes to kill.During a battle with the Avengers, Black Dwarf and Supergiant are killed, Ebony Maw betrays Thanos and frees Thane. Thane traps Thanos, Corvus Glaive, and Proxima Midnight in an amber construct which leaves them in a state of "living death."While imprisoned in the Triskelion, Thanos was approached by a mysterious cloaked figure who offered him support in obtaining the Mjolnir of Earth-1610. Thanos accepted the deal. In order to make sure it was a success, Thanos formed a second incarnation of the Black Order with Proxima Midnight and Black Swan of Earth-1365. He dispatched them to the Collector's ship in order to obtain the Mjolnir of Earth-1610. There, the trio battled Thor and Beta Ray Bill and failed in retrieving the hammer. Upon returning to Thanos, the cloaked figure revealed herself to be the Asgardian Death Goddess Hela who then brutally killed both Black Swan and Proxima Midnight to demonstrate her power. She told Thanos that she needed his help to reclaim her rulership of Hel and offered to grant him the death he has long been seeking in exchange. They then kiss in a passionate embrace.After Thanos was killed by Gamora, Hela along with the Black Order, now using Knowhere as their ship, stole Thanos' body from Starfox, in order for Hela to resurrect him. After getting the head from Annihilus, the Black Order went to Eros, who was revealed to be the consciousness of Thanos in the body of his brother, and plans to go back to his own body.


=== Corvus Glaive's version ===
After the restructuring of the multiverse, at the time when Thanos was missing, Corvus Glaive formed a second version of the Black Order where he gathered the worst criminals the universe had to offer as part of his plan to create his own empire. Using a moon called the Black Quadrant that belonged to Thanos, Corvus Glaive and the Black Order began to conquer different planets. When Thanos returned, he broke the blade off of Corvus Glaive's pike. Rather than die at the hands of Thanos, Corvus Glaive took the broken blade and killed himself. Afterwards, Thanos reclaimed the Black Quadrant.


=== Challenger's version ===
During the "No Surrender" arc, the Black Order was reorganized with Ebony Maw and Black Swan with Corvus Glaive, Proxima Midnight, and Black Dwarf back from the dead while Supergiant is alive as a psychic projection. Earth was stolen from where it used to be the battleground for the Black Order's fight with an alien version of the Lethal Legion that was formed by Grandmaster. It was revealed that this Black Order was formed by the Challenger who is an old rival of Grandmaster. After the Avengers put an end to the contest, the Black Order regroups on the planet Angargal. They are approached by Grandmaster who had an offer for them.


== Members ==


=== Thanos' first version ===
Black Dwarf - A member of the Black Order who has super-strength, enhanced density, and impenetrable skin. He is the brother of Corvus Glaive. He is killed by Ronan the Accuser.
Corvus Glaive - Thanos' most favored general who has enhanced strength, speed, durability, and endurance and uses a bladed pike which can cut through anything. When Corvus Glaive has the bladed pike in his hand, it makes him immortal. He commits suicide to avoid being killed by Thanos.
Ebony Maw - A member of the Black Order who has genius-level intellect, and specializes in persuasion. He utilizes a teleportation device and force field generator.
Proxima Midnight - A member of the Black Order and the wife of Corvus Glaive. She is a master hand-to-hand combatant, has super-strength and possesses a high degree of imperviousness to injury. Her lance transforms into unavoidable toxic light beams. She is killed by Hela.
Supergiant - A member of the Black Order with telepathic abilities. She is apparently killed by Lockjaw, but later returns as a being of psychic energy.


=== Corvus Glaive's version ===
Corvus Glaive - Leader. Committed suicide.
Coven - A trio of three unnamed witches. Following Corvus Glaive's death, the Coven remained allied with Thanos.


=== Thanos' second version ===
Thanos
Proxima Midnight
Black Swan of Earth-1365


=== Challenger's version ===
Black Dwarf
Black Swan
Corvus Glaive
Ebony Maw
Proxima Midnight
Supergiant


== In other media ==


=== Television ===
The Black Order appears in Avengers Assemble, with Proxima Midnight voiced by Kari Wahlgren, Corvus Glaive voiced by David Kaye, Ebony Maw voiced by René Auberjonois, Supergiant voiced by Hynden Walch, and Black Dwarf having no dialogue. The group first appears in the episode "New Frontiers" where they infiltrate a special prison where they take out the guards and its defenses in order to free Thanos. Thanos leads the Black Order into attacking New Korbin, causing the Korbinite Jeter Kan Too to enlist the Avengers to help their world. In the episode "Avengers World", the Black Order joins in Thanos's attack on Earth and the fight with the Avengers. After Thanos was defeated, the Black Order are mentioned to be in the custody of the Guardians of the Galaxy.
The Black Order appears in Guardians of the Galaxy, with Kari Wahlgren, David Kaye and Hynden Walch reprising their roles as Proxima Midnight, Corvus Glaive and Supergiant while Ebony Maw is voiced by James Urbaniak and Black Dwarf is voiced by Jesse Burch. In the episode "Undercover Angle", Supergiant had been previously apprehended by the Nova Corps while the other members were seen on the desert planet of Eilsel 4 planning to obtain the Universal Weapon that Ronan the Accuser wielded. When both parties find the Universal Weapon, they are both attacked by Titus causing a temporary truce to keep Titus from selling it to Collector. Most of the Black Order were defeated by Titus and were later arrested by the Nova Corps. In the episode "Stuck in the Metal with You", the Black Order attacks the Guardians of the Galaxy on the planet Retsemaw where the Destroyer Armor was located. Rocket Raccoon used the Destroyer Armor to easily defeat them and they were left tied up for the Nova Corps to pick up. In the episode "Lyin' Eyes," Ebony Maw was shown to have left the Black Order when he was swayed by Mantis to join the Universal Believers. In the episode "Free Bird," Ebony Maw has gotten Proxima Midnight and Black Dwarf on the side of the Universal Believes. The three of them attack Star-Lord, Gamora, and Groot on Veros Seven even when they end up in a trap at the Ravagers' former hideout that Star-Lord designed when he was young. With help from an unnamed avian-resembling energy parasite that hatched from an egg that Groot found, Star-Lord, Gamora, and Groot were able to escape the trap and repel Ebony Maw, Black Dwarf, and Proxima Midnight.


=== Film ===
Ebony Maw, Black Dwarf (renamed Cull Obsidian), Proxima Midnight and Corvus Glaive appear in the 2018 film Avengers: Infinity War, where they are known as the "Children of Thanos". Tom Vaughan-Lawlor voices and motion-captures Ebony Maw; Terry Notary voices and motion-captures Cull Obsidian; Carrie Coon voices and facial-captures Proxima Midnight, with motion capture (while provided a little by Coon due to her pregnancy during filming) being provided by stuntwoman Monique Ganderton; and Michael James Shaw voices and motion-captures Corvus Glaive. Directors Joe and Anthony Russo took several creative liberties with the group's depiction, most notably excluding fifth member Supergiant for "consolidation". Other changes include renaming Black Dwarf, depicting the group as "Children of Thanos", and altering their abilities for the film. Assisting Thanos in finding the Infinity Stones, they are sent to Earth to retrieve the Time and Mind Stones, while Thanos, already having the Power and Space stones, goes to Knowhere to obtain the Reality Stone. Maw and Obsidian attempt to remove the Time Stone from the Eye of Agamotto, which Doctor Strange wears in an amulet, and when they cannot Maw kidnaps him, while Glaive and Midnight attempt to steal the Mind Stone from Vision. Over the course of the film, they are each conquered by the superheroes they face: Maw is defeated by Tony Stark, Obsidian by Bruce Banner (in the Hulkbuster armor), Midnight by Scarlet Witch, and Glaive by Vision.
The Children of Thanos (with Ganderton fully taking over the role of Midnight) return in the 2019 film Avengers: Endgame, where 2014 versions of the characters travel through time with Thanos' forces to take part in the climactic battle on Earth. They all die once again with Obsidian killed by Scott Lang, Glaive killed by Okoye, and Maw and Midnight disintegrated along with the rest of Thanos' forces, when Tony Stark activates the Infinity Stones.


=== Video games ===
The Black Order appears in:
Marvel: Avengers Alliance
Marvel: Future Fight
Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2 in the Avengers: Infinity War DLC Pack.
Marvel: Ultimate Alliance 3: The Black Order
The Black Order's four members Cull Obsidian, Ebony Maw, Proxima Midnight and Corvus Glaive appear in:
Marvel: Contest of Champions
Marvel vs Capcom


== References ==


== External links ==
Black Order (Thanos' version) at Marvel Wiki
Black Order (Corvus Glaive's version) at Marvel Wiki
Black Order at Comic Vine