Fidesco International

Fidesco is an NGO for international solidarity which sends volunteers to countries in the South to put their professional skills at the service of development projects, to help local populations or humanitarian actions. It was founded in 1981 by the Emmanuel Community, following a meeting in the Vatican with African bishops,
Volunteers who leave with Fidesco are singles, couples or families, young people, adults or retired, wishing in the name of their faith to work for the marginalized: this explains the name of FIDES - CO : faith and co-operation.


== Mission work ==
They put themselves at the service of partners of the local Catholic Church, in answer to a need and a request. These partners already work for the good of disadvantaged populations, regardless of religion, ethnicity or culture, in very diverse fields: education, teaching, management, construction, health… and in varied establishments: dispensaries, refugee camps, centers for street children, agricultural schools…


== Organization of Fidesco ==
Fidesco is more and more present on the international stage and sends volunteers on mission from countries as far apart as Belgium, Australia and Brazil… Fidesco now has 11 offices all over the world: in France, Belgium, Germany, Portugal, Netherlands, Austria, Poland, the United States, Australia, Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda.
Fidesco has been granted the status of "Volunteer Organization of International solidarity" by the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs (VSI, statute defined by law of the 23/02/05).
In France Fidesco is rated an association of public utility and is member of the Coordination-South, CLONG-Voluntariat (Committee of Connected Volunteer ONG's) and the National Council of Solidarity. Globally Fidesco is part of the Pontifical Council Cor Unum.
Fidesco is an NGO (non-governmental organization). It is a charitable organization (law 1901) judged an association of public utility and therefore entitled to receive gifts and legacies.


== See also ==
Catholic Church
Catholicism
Evangelism
Mission
Catholic mission
Missionary
Catholic social teaching
Caritas Internationalis


== External links ==
Official site of the Emmanuel Community
Fidesco official site US
Fidesco official site UK