Gombe State

Gombe, usually referred to as Gombe State to distinguish it from the city of Gombe, is located in the northeastern part of Nigeria, is one of the country's 36 states; its capital is Gombe. The boundaries of the state roughly correspond to those of the Tangale-Waja Chiefdom and Gombe Emirate, a traditional state.
The State, nicknamed the Jewel In The Savannah, was formed in October 1996 from part of the old Bauchi State by the Abacha military government. Its location in the north eastern zone, right within the expansive savannah, allows the state to share common borders with the states of Borno, Yobe, Taraba, Adamawa and Bauchi. The state has an area of 20,265 km² and a population of around 2,365,000 people as of 2006. Gombe has two distinct climates, the dry season (November–March) and the rainy season (April–October) with an average rainfall of 850mm. The State is headed by the Executive Governor Muhammad Inuwa Yahaya and also has 24 State House Assembly members. Gombe has 11 Local Government Areas and 14 Emirates /chiefdoms. It has 3 Senators and 6 Members in the National Assembly.


== Local Government Areas ==
Gombe State consists of eleven (11) Local Government Areas. They are:


== Demographic composition ==
Gombe State is a multi-ethnic society that consists of the dominant Fulani tribe, who inhabit the Northern part of the Gombe State, and Tangale, who occupy the southern part of the state. Other ethnicities include the Hausa, Tera, Waja, Bolewa, and Kanuri, with their different cultural as well as lingual affiliations. The second largest ethnic group apart from Hausa is the Tera, who occupy the greater part of Yamaltu Deba Local Government. The state capital, Gombe, is a reflection of the heterogeneity of the state.
By: Bappaji Musa Nafada


== Notable people ==
Professor Saleh Abdu, teaching and research
Danladi Mohammed, politician
Joshua M. Lidani, politician
Eli Jidere Bala, engineer
Usman Bayero Nafada, politician
Samkon Gado, Nigerian-American otolaryngologist and American football player
Zainab Adamu Bulkachuwa, jurist
Jaaruma, enterprenuer
Aliyu Modibbo Umar, politician
Mohammed Danjuma Goje, politician
Helon Habila, novelist


== References ==