Robert Greville, 4th Baron Brooke (page does not exist)

Duke of Manchester is a title in the Peerage of Great Britain, and the current senior title of the House of Montagu. It was created in 1719 for the politician Charles Montagu, 4th Earl of Manchester.


== Origin ==
Their ancestor was Richard Ladde, grandfather of the Lord Chief Justice Sir Edward, who changed his name to Montagu around 1447. His descendants claimed a connection with the older house of Montagu or Montacute, Barons Montagu or Montacute and Earls of Salisbury, but there is no sound evidence that the two families were related. A case has been made out for the possibility that the Ladde alias came from a division among coheirs about 1420 of the remaining small inheritance of a line of Montagus at Spratton and Little Creton, also in Northamptonshire.The judge Sir Edward Montagu's grandson, Edward Montagu, was raised to the peerage as 1st Baron Montagu of Boughton. He is the ancestor of the Dukes of Montagu.  His brother, Sir Henry Montagu (c. 1563–1642), who served as Lord Chief Justice as well as Lord High Treasurer and Lord Privy Seal, was in 1620 raised to the Peerage of England as Viscount Mandeville, with the additional title Baron Montagu of Kimbolton, of Kimbolton in the County of Huntingdon. In 1626, he was made Earl of Manchester, of Manchester in the County of Lancaster. It is said that the title referred not to the city of Manchester, but to Godmanchester in Huntingdonshire. The word "God" was deliberately excluded from the title, as Henry thought it would be blasphemous for him to be known as "Lord Godmanchester".His son, the 2nd Earl, was a prominent Parliamentary General during the Civil War, but later supported the restoration of Charles II. His son, the 3rd Earl, represented Huntingdonshire in the House of Commons. His son was the 4th Earl, who in 1719 was created Duke of Manchester.


== Descent ==
Charles, 1st Duke of Manchester, was succeeded by his eldest son. The 2nd Duke notably served as Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard in the administration of Sir Robert Walpole. He was childless, and on his death, the titles passed to his younger brother, the 3rd Duke. He had earlier represented Huntingdonshire in Parliament. He was succeeded by his son, the 4th Duke. He was Ambassador to France and served as Lord Chamberlain of the Household. His son, the 5th Duke, was Governor of Jamaica between 1827 and 1830 also held office as Postmaster General. He was succeeded by his son, the 6th Duke. He represented Huntingdon in the House of Commons as a Tory.
His eldest son, the 7th Duke, was Conservative Member of Parliament for Bewdley and Huntingdonshire. His son, the 8th Duke, briefly represented Huntingdonshire in Parliament. He was succeeded by his eldest son, the 9th Duke. He sat on the Liberal benches in the House of Lords and served as Captain of the Yeomen of the Guard in the Liberal administration of Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. In the twentieth century, mismanagement and profligacy resulted in the wholesale depletion of the Dukedom's estates. Generational instability caused further damage to the family's honour: both the 11th and 12th Dukes had a criminal record.


== Seats ==

The principal estate of the Dukes of Manchester was Kimbolton Castle. It was sold, together with 50 acres of parkland, by the 10th Duke in 1951, and is now a private school. A remaining 3,250 acres of the estate were sold by his eldest son and heir in 1975. The other family seat was Tandragee Castle, in County Armagh, Northern Ireland. It was sold in 1955, and the remaining estate in 1975, and is now the headquarters of Tayto (NI) Ltd.


== Arms ==
The arms of the Duke of Manchester have the following blazon: Quarterly, 1st & 4th: Argent, 3 fusils conjoined in fess gules (Montagu); 2nd & 3rd: Or an eagle displayed vert beaked and membered gules (Monthermer). The fusils or diamond shapes in the Montagu arms were originally intended to represent a range of mountains, as the name comes from the old French mont agu meaning "pointed hill". The arms represent a claim to be a cadet of the medieval Montagu (Montacute) family, earls of Salisbury, for which there is no proof (see above origins).


== Titles and styles ==
The Duke of Manchester holds the subsidiary titles Earl of Manchester, Viscount Mandeville, and Baron Montagu of Kimbolton.
The Duke of Manchester is styled Your Grace (spoken style) or His Grace (reference style), alternatively Sir.
The heir apparent to the Dukedom takes the courtesy title Viscount Mandeville, and the heir apparent's heir apparent, when such exists, is styled Lord Kimbolton.


== Burial place ==
Many members of the Montagu family (Earls and Dukes of Manchester) are buried at St Andrew's Church, Kimbolton, Cambridgeshire. Several Montagu monuments still exist in the South Chapel, while the Montagu vault (extended in 1853) is located beneath the North Chapel. The 12th Duke of Manchester was cremated at Bedford Crematorium in 2002.


== Viscount Mandeville (1620) ==


== Earls of Manchester (1626) ==


== Dukes of Manchester (1719) ==


== Line of succession to the Dukedom of Manchester ==
? Alexander Montagu, Viscount Mandeville (born 1993), only son of the 13th Duke (disputed since he was born in a bigamous marriage).
Lord Kimble Montagu (born 1964), second son of the 12th Duke.
William Montagu (born 2000), elder son of Lord Kimble
Roderick Montagu (born 1930), only son of Lord Edward Montagu, grandson of the 9th Duke
Michael Montagu, (born 1955), only son of John Montagu, 5× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Henry Montagu, (born 1935), first son of Robert Montagu, 4× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Cyril Montagu, (born 1937), second son of Robert Montagu, 4× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Graeme Montagu, (born 1967), first son of Cyril Montagu, 5× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Christopher Montagu (born 1968), second son of Cyril Montagu, 5× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Gerard Montagu, (born 1940), third son of Robert Montagu, 4× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Matthew Montagu (born 1976), only son of Gerard Montagu, 5× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Robert Montagu (born 1947), first son of John Montagu, 3× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
James Montagu (born 1975), only son of Robert Montagu, 4× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Christopher Montagu (born 1950), second son of John Montagu, 3× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
David Montagu (born 1976), first son of Christopher Montagu, 4× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Oliver Montagu (born 2009), only son of David Montagu, 5× great-grandson of the 6th Duke
Thomas Montagu (born 1979), second son of Christopher Montagu, 4× great-grandson of the 6th Duke


== Line of succession of the Earldom of Manchester ==
Richard Montagu, (born 1956) first son of Michael Montagu
George Montagu, (born 1993) only son of Richard Montagu
Alan Montagu, (born 1958) second son of Michael Montagu
Miles Montagu, (born 1994) only son of Alan Montagu
James Montagu, (born 1962) third son of Michael Montagu


== Family tree ==


== Ancestry ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==