Big Trees Village, California

Big Trees Village is an unincorporated community in Calaveras County, California. It lies at an elevation of 5164 feet (1574 m).
The Big Trees Village subdivision consists of approximately 2000 properties, most about 1/2 acre in size, and is managed by a property owners association called Big Trees Village Property Owners Association (BTVPOA).  The Big Trees Village subdivision completely surrounds another smaller subdivision called Snowshoe Springs.  The homes in Snowshoe Springs are managed by a separate homeowners association called Snowshoe Springs Homeowners Association.
Property owners in Big Trees Village have physical addresses in Camp Connell, CA and Dorrington, CA.  There is a post office in Camp Connell, CA for mail. The zip code is 95223, which is shared with Arnold, Camp Connell, Dorrington and Bear Valley.   Mail is not delivered to individual homes.


== Weather ==
The climate in the Dorrington/Camp Connell area is generally pleasant.  Mild summers and mild winters allow for a generous number of sunny days for outdoor play.
Summers temps rarely go above the mid 90's.  The cooler temps typically draw visitors from the hot Central Valley of California.	
Winters generally bring snow.  While the snow may be deep at times, the temperatures are often at freezing, or above, thereby making the activity of playing in the snow (skiing, sledding, building snowmen, or snowball fights) highly likely and often.  


== History ==
In 1966 the Calaveras Development Company started plans to develop units 1,2, & 3.  In 1968 American Forest Properties started development plans for units 4-9,  in 1979 the Deerwood Corporation developed units 11A-11D and 12A-B.  Deerwood Corporation still owns property in BTV today.
The Recreation Center was built by American Forest Properties, a development company that has been sold several times over the past forty plus years.  It was first built for the employees of American Forest Properties in 1969-1970.  In 1974 the entire Recreation Center and 11 additional acres were deeded to the Big Trees Village Property Owners’ Association.  The Association was formed in 1974 to accept the common area, being the Recreation Center and eleven acres.  In 1998 the eleven acres were sold to bolster the reserves of the Association.  The current Recreation Center is located on 17 acres at the intersection of Boards Crossing and Sierra Parkway.  Approximately 2.5 acres along Boards Crossing and Sierra Parkway to Shoshone was donated to the Association from the Ebbetts Pass Fire District in 1998.  This property cannot be sold by the Association; in the agreement it is to revert to the Fire District if the Association no longer exists.


== Recreation center ==
The facility has two swimming pools, two tennis courts, two shuffleboard decks, two horseshoe pits, one sand volleyball court, one basketball court, one volleyball area court, a children’s playground, large picnic area, and a full size athletic field.  Recently an 18 hole Frisbee Golf Course was added.  There are four buildings, two asphalt parking lots, asphalt walkway and driveway.  The swimming pools are completely fenced and the three main buildings are alarmed as is the perimeter of the pool area.
This facility requires year-round maintenance.  The facility is open from Memorial Day to Labor Day to property owners.  Association membership is voluntary and admission to the pools is a separate fee.  Association membership fees cover costs to maintain the 17 acres and its amenities.  Pool fees pay for employee wags, pool maintenance and operation.  Membership runs from May 1 to April 30 every year.


== The association ==
The Big Trees Village Property Owners’ Association is a non-profit California corporation.  It is unique as membership is not mandatory.  The governing documents consist of Articles of Corporation, By-Laws, and Design and Use Guidelines.  The association CC&R’s expired in October 2016.  The association employs a General Manager year-round.


== References ==

SourcesU.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System: Big Trees Village, California
History Section from "Recreation Center Guide" by W. Redman, BTVPOA Office, 1/11/2008


== External links ==
U.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System: Big Trees Village, California