Girls Like You

"Girls Like You" is a song recorded by American band Maroon 5, from their sixth studio album Red Pill Blues (2017). A second version featuring American rapper Cardi B, was released by 222 Records and Interscope Records on May 31, 2018, as the album's  fifth and final single. This version was written by Adam Levine, Cirkut, Cardi B, Starrah, Jason Evigan and Gian Stone and was produced by Cirkut and Evigan. The single was included on the re-issue edition of the album.
The song's accompanying music video was directed by David Dobkin, which features the band and Levine performing the song in front of a spotlight and a number of women making their appearances. The single is a commercial success, peaking at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, making it Maroon 5's fourth and Cardi B's third chart-topper, who extended her record for most number-ones among female rappers. It also spent 33 weeks in the top 10, tying both Ed Sheeran's "Shape of You" and Post Malone and Swae Lee's "Sunflower" for the longest top 10 run in the chart's archives and a record-setting 36 weeks at number one on the Adult Contemporary chart. Additionally, it reached number one in eleven other countries, including Canada and New Zealand.
"Girls Like You" has won multiple awards including at the 2019 Billboard Music Awards and the iHeartRadio Titanium Awards, while its music video won for Winning Video at the 2018 MTV Video Play Awards. The song received a nomination for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards.


== Background ==
"Girls Like You" was released as the ninth track on Red Pill Blues via Apple Music. On May 30, 2018, Maroon 5 announced a new version of the song with rapper Cardi B, as the fifth and final single from the album, following the song "Wait", to be released the next day. The band released four remix versions of the song, featuring St. Vincent on August 2, 2018, followed by Cray, Tokimonsta and WondaGurl, on the following day August 3. In an interview with Variety, Levine stated he told Cardi before she wrote her verse, "I want you to put something down that shows your fierceness as a woman and say it however you want."


== Composition ==
"Girls Like You" is a pop and pop rock song. It has a length of three minutes and 35 seconds in the original version, while the extended single version is 20 seconds longer. It was written by Adam Levine, Cirkut, Cardi B, Starrah, Jason Evigan and Gian Stone and was produced by Cirkut and Evigan.
The song is written in the key of C major with a tempo of 125 beats per minute. It moves in common time, with Levine's vocals spanning from C3 to C5.


== Commercial performance ==
"Girls Like You" debuted at number 94 on the US Billboard Hot 100, and ascended to number four following its first full week of tracking after the music video's arrival. The single made the fourth-biggest jump (90 positions) in the Hot 100's history, and became Maroon 5's 14th and Cardi B's sixth top-ten single overall. After spending six weeks at number two behind Drake's "In My Feelings", the single reached number one on its 17th charting week, becoming Maroon 5's fourth chart topper–their first since 2012's "One More Night"–and Cardi B's third. Cardi extended her record for most number ones among female rappers. Maroon 5 became the duo or group with the most Hot 100 number ones in the 2000s and 2010s.
"Girls Like You" became the first pop song to lead the chart after the record run of 34 consecutive weeks that rap songs had ruled the Hot 100, from January to September 2018. The single spent seven weeks atop the Hot 100, making Cardi the female rapper with the most cumulative weeks atop the chart, with eleven weeks. With 33 weeks in the top 10, it tied both Ed Sheeran's "Shape of You" and Post Malone and Swae Lee's "Sunflower" for the longest top 10 run in the chart's archives. "Girls Like You" also spent 36 consecutive weeks at number one on the Adult Contemporary, breaking the previous record on the chart was Uncle Kracker's 2003 version of "Drift Away" for 28 weeks.With "Girls Like You" following "I Like It" at the top of Radio Songs, Cardi B became the first female rapper to ever replace herself at number one on that chart. With 16 weeks on top, it tied Mariah Carey's "We Belong Together" and No Doubt's "Don't Speak" for the second longest-leading number one on the Radio Songs chart, while matching Carey for the longest leading this century. With the single, the band scored its record-extending 13th number one on the Adult Top 40 radio airplay chart.


== Music videos ==


=== Official video ===

The official music video premiered on YouTube, on May 31, 2018 at midnight 12AM (EST) and was directed by David Dobkin. The video follows Adam Levine, alone at a microphone on the spotlight, with the band playing instruments in the background, then a rotating assortment of women dancing and lip-syncing around him. The video featured a large number of appearances from Maroon 5's band members: guitarist James Valentine, bassist Mickey Madden, keyboardist and rhythm guitarist Jesse Carmichael, drummer Matt Flynn, keyboardist PJ Morton and multi-instrumentalist Sam Farrar, with the song's featured artist Cardi B. In order of appearance, the list includes a number of women are making their cameos: Camila Cabello, Phoebe Robinson, Aly Raisman, Sarah Silverman, Gal Gadot, Lilly Singh, Amani al-Khatahtbeh, Trace Lysette, Tiffany Haddish, Angy Rivera, Franchesca Ramsey, Millie Bobby Brown, Ellen DeGeneres, Jennifer Lopez, Chloe Kim, Alex Morgan, Mary J. Blige, Beanie Feldstein, Jackie Fielder, Danica Patrick, Ilhan Omar, Elizabeth Banks, Ashley Graham, Rita Ora and Levine's wife Behati Prinsloo, and their daughter Dusty Rose.The clothing worn by the guests of the music video features several messages that represent various social justice and identity movements. Immigrant rights activist Angy Rivera of New York State Youth Leadership Council wears her organization's T-shirt with the phrase "Undocumented Unafraid Unapologetic". Olympic gymnast Aly Raisman wore a T-shirt with the phrase "Always Speak Your Truth". Jackie Fielder, founder of indigenous-led San Francisco Defund DAPL Coalition, wore a T-shirt with the words "Divest, Water is Life"."Girls Like You" topped YouTube's 2018 Songs of the Summer list globally, and ranked third in the United States. As of November 2019, the video has received more than 2.4 billion views and with over 15 million likes, making it the site's 23rd most viewed and sixth most liked video. It is also Vevo's most viewed video of 2018.


=== Alternate versions ===
Two alternate versions of the video, both were directed by Dobkin. The first version is a vertical video was released exclusively on Spotify on August 27, 2018. Similar to the original version, it focuses on the same women dancing and singing in rotation, with the exception of Cabello. The second version simply titled Volume 2, released on October 16, 2018 on YouTube. This version includes additional footage and Cabello. The video ends with the voice of Dobkin saying "cut" and the sound of people clapping. In the second half of Volume 2, Levine briefly wears a t-shirt with the words "Liberation Not Deportation", created by the organization, NYSYLC.


=== Lyric video ===
The band released a lyric video of the original song on February 14, 2019 (Valentine's Day). The animated video follows Adam Levine's journey growing up, becoming a musician, forming the band now known as Maroon 5 and performing a sold-out concert. Levine is shown driving with various women in his car then spending time alone and focusing on his music. Finally, he meets and falls in love with Behati Prinsloo. They date, get married, and start a family at the end.


== Live performances ==
On May 30, 2018, Maroon 5 performed "Girls Like You" for the first time in Tacoma, Washington from the Red Pill Blues Tour (2018–2019), where they also performed a cover version of "Forever Young" by Alphaville, as a tribute to their late manager Jordan Feldstein. On February 3, 2019, the band performed this song for the Super Bowl LIII halftime show in Atlanta, Georgia. On June 8, Maroon 5 performed the song for the music festival concert, Capital's Summertime Ball at Wembley Stadium, London. On October 25, the band performed "Girls Like You" for a live concert at Seminole Hard Rock Hotel & Casino in Hollywood, Florida.


== In other media ==
"Girls Like You" is featured on the television shows Songland and Love Island UK. It is also appeared on the video game Rock Band 4 (as part of the downloadable content for the Rock Band Rivals series) and the compilation albums Now That's What I Call Music! 67 and Now That's What I Call Music! 101.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Track listing ==


== Credits and personnel ==
Credits adapted from AllMusic and Tidal.Recording

Recorded at Conway Recording Studios, Los Angeles, CaliforniaCredits

Adam Levine – vocals, songwriter
Cardi B – featured vocals, songwriter
Cirkut – producer, songwriter
Starrah – songwriter
Jason Evigan – producer, songwriter
Gian Stone – songwriter
Serban Ghenea – mixer
Noah Passavoy – recording
Isaiah Tejada – keyboards, synths


== Charts ==


== Certifications ==


== Release history ==


== See also ==
List of Airplay 100 number ones of the 2010s
List of Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles of 2018
List of Canadian Hot 100 number-one singles of 2018
List of number-one songs of 2018 (Malaysia)
List of number-one songs of 2018 (Singapore)
List of Billboard Adult Contemporary number ones of 2018 and 2019 (U.S.)


== References ==