Afro-Russians

Afro-Russians are people of African descent or those who are perceived to be dark-skinned compared to other given populations that have migrated to and settled in Russia. The Metis Foundation estimates that there are about 50,000 Afro-Russians.


== Terminology ==
Representatives of African peoples in the Russian language are commonly called negry. The word negr comes from the Spanish: negro through other European languages (German: Neger, French: nègre). In the Russian language the word does not carry a negative connotation.


== During the Russian Empire ==

A notable member of this small group is Abram Petrovich Gannibal: an African emancipated and adopted by Peter the Great, given education, raised to nobility, and served in both civil and military capacities.  He is also a great-grandfather on the maternal side to the famed Russian poet Alexander Pushkin.


== Early Soviet period ==
After the revolution several black African families came to the Soviet Union under the auspices of the Comintern. They were chiefly specialists in the spheres of industrial production and agriculture. The technical equipment, modest means, and professional experience brought by them were an appreciable contribution to economic development of a new state. Among them were Oliver John Golden and his wife Bertha Bialek (he brought with him a group of 16 Afro-American experts in the cultivation of cotton), well-known African-American poet Langston Hughes with a group of 22 filmmakers, Paul Robeson with his family and many others. Some of them stayed in Russia and their descendants still live there.


== Post-War, the Festival Children ==
When African nations gained independence from colonialism, the Soviet Union offered scholarships to young people from these nations. About 400,000 Africans studied in the former Soviet Union between the late 1950s and 1990. The first significant arrival of Africans was for the 6th World Festival of Youth and Students held in Moscow in 1957. Many Africans also attended the Patrice Lumumba University.


== Notable Afro-Russians ==
Epiphanny Prince (African-American and dual Russian and American citizen), basketball player
Deanna Nolan (African-American and dual Russian and American citizen), basketball player
Lyukman Adams (Nigerian father), triple jumper
Aleksandr Alumona (Nigerian father), footballer
Cirilo Tadeus Cardozo Filho (Brazilian-born), futsal player
Joaquim Crima (born in Guinea Bissau), farmer and politician
Allan Dugblei (Ghanaian father), footballer
Abram Gannibal (Central Africa), statesman, military leader, politician
Ivan Gannibal (son of Abram Gannibal), military leader
Roy Jones, Jr. (African-American and dual Russian and American citizen), boxer
Alice Edun (Nigerian father), singer
Nkeirouka Ezekh (Nigerian father), Olympic curler
Jon Robert Holden (African-American and dual Russian and American citizen), basketball player
Brian Idowu (Nigerian father, half-Nigerian, half-Russian mother), Russian Premier League footballer
Victor Keyru (Sierra Leonean father), basketball player
Yelena Khanga (Zanzibari father, African-American mother), journalist and TV anchor
Stanislav Lebamba (Congolese father), footballer
Cyrille Makanda (Camerounian father), basketball player
Avua-Siav Leo Nelson (Ghanaian father), footballer
Peter Odemwingie (Nigerian father), footballer
Adessoye Oyewole (Nigerian father), footballer
James Lloydovich Patterson, Russian actor of African-American and Ukrainian descent
Jean Sagbo (Benin-born naturalized Russian), politician, elected councilman of the town of Novozavidovo
Jerry-Christian Tchuissé (Camerounian-born), footballer
Emiliya Turey (mixed-race father of Sierra Leonean descent), handball player
Devis Uko (Nigerian father), footballer
Grigory Siyatvinda (mixed-race father of Zambian descent), actor
Elladj Baldé (Guinean father), figure skater
Jacques Anthony (Congolese father), rapper


== See also ==
Afro-Abkhazians


== References ==


== External links ==
Funmetis a Foundation for Afro-Russian Children
(in Russian) Article "Afro-Russians" from Rossiyskaya Gazeta
(in Russian) Article "Black Man" from Online Vremya