Juan Carlos Carcedo

Juan Carlos Carcedo Mardones (Spanish pronunciation: [xwaŋ ˈkaɾlos kaɾˈθeðo]; born 19 August 1973) is a Spanish retired footballer who played as a midfielder, and is the assistant manager of English club Arsenal.
He amassed Segunda División totals of 134 matches and four goals during seven seasons, mainly with Atlético Madrid B and Leganés. He subsequently worked as an assistant manager, always under Unai Emery.


== Playing career ==
Born in Logroño, La Rioja, Carcedo began his career at CE L'Hospitalet in Segunda División B, making his debut in the competition on 5 September 1993 in a 3–3 draw at Gimnàstic de Tarragona and being sent off in the 85th minute. He played a 31 further matches during that season, earning a second dismissal on 10 October in a 1–1 home draw against UE Rubí.In the summer of 1996, after one-year spells in the lower leagues with UDA Gramenet and RCD Espanyol B – scoring his first goal as a senior on 18 September 1994 to open a 3–1 win for the former over CD Alcoyano– Carcedo signed for Atlético Madrid, being assigned to the reserves in Segunda División. In the 2000–01 campaign he appeared in 16 competitive matches for the first team (on loan from French side OGC Nice) as they also competed in that level, the first one being a 0–1 league home loss to Recreativo de Huelva on 9 September 2000 in which he started.Carcedo then moved to another club in the capital, CD Leganés, where he played three years in the second tier. He retired after a couple of seasons in the third with UD Las Palmas, earning promotion in the latter but only contributing with four games to that feat.


== Coaching career ==
On retiring, Carcedo became assistant manager to Unai Emery at UD Almería. Despite being offered the main position at the club, he left and followed Emery to Valencia CF in 2008; in 2012, they worked together at Russia's FC Spartak Moscow.The pair returned to Spain the following year, being appointed at Sevilla FC. On 10 May 2015, Carcedo was put in charge of the team for their match away to RC Celta de Vigo following the death of Emery's father Juan, and he led the team to a 1–1 draw.In June 2016, Carcedo was one of several staff members who accompanied Emery to French title-holders Paris Saint-Germain FC. Two years later later, after seven titles won, both left for Arsenal in the English Premier League.


== References ==


== External links ==
Juan Carlos Carcedo at BDFutbol
Juan Carlos Carcedo at FootballDatabase.eu