First International Computer

First International Computer, Inc. (FIC; Chinese: 大眾電腦股份有限公司; pinyin: Dàzhòng Diànnǎo Gǔfèn Yǒuxiàn Gōngsī) is a Taiwanese computer and components manufacturer, that designs and manufactures computer products and electronic components for other electronics equipment manufacturers worldwide. Founded in 1980 by Dr. Ming-J Chien, in Taipei, Taiwan, FIC is publicly listed on the Taiwan Stock Exchange (TSE 3701), FIC has a workforce of over 5000 employees spread amongst 2 manufacturing/assembly sites and 4 branch offices. The company's products include motherboards, embedded computing systems, graphics cards, PCs, and notebook computers. In 2011, FIC started to focus its core business in the fields of automotive electronic designs, building automation system and green energy system integration. 


== Service Categories ==
First International Computer service includes: DMS (Design Manufacturing Service), AAM (Automotive, Automation and Medical) solution, Smart Management System for Smart City & IoT application. FIC also provides Automotive Electronics Design solutions include AR HUD design, smart fleet management, digital cluster design, OBD design, ADAS product design, car ECU design, etc. They also offer the solutions of smart clothing for health care, smart automation for building, small sites, retail remote, and traffic remote management.


== Company Perspectives ==
First International Computer, Inc. was formed by Dr. Ming J. Chien in 1980 and has enjoyed considerable success year after year. FIC is now a dominant force in the technology market both in research and development and manufacturing fields. As Computer, Communication and Consumer Electronics (3C) markets have converged, FIC has adapted and developed to become a respected producer of 3C related products. Many new and innovative products have joined the FIC range and the company is no longer simply known for its award winning range of motherboards. In 2011, FIC started to focus its core business in the fields of automotive electronic designs, building automation system and green energy system integration. In recent years, FIC becomes a leading provider of DMS (Design 
Manufacturing Service) for global potential Tier 1/ Tier 2 customers. 


== Key Dates ==
1980: Charlene Wang and Ming Chien found company as a sales agent for main frame and micro computers.
1983: The company begins assembling its first PC computer systems under the Leo brand.
1987: The company enters motherboard manufacturing with large-scale production facility in Hsien-Tien.
1989: First International begins assembling PCs with Intel processors.
1991: U.S. and European subsidiaries are opened and production of the first in-house personal computer design begins.
1994: A configuration plant is opened in the Netherlands.
1996: A manufacturing and configuration plant is opened in Austin, Texas.
1997: A plant is opened in the Czech Republic.
1998: A plant is opened in Brazil.
1999: A large scale production facility is opened in Guanzhou, in mainland China.
2002: A new manufacturing headquarters is set up in China.
2003: Created the first AIO PC and became the e-book OEM partner of Panasonic.
2004: Transformed to a Holding company as known as FICG.
2005: Became the NB ODM partner of Fujitsu Siemens.
2007: Launched 7” UMPC.
2008: Obtained the value-added notebook orders from Fujitsu.
2010: Announced reseller agreement with Tridium to provide solutions in Green House & Environmental Controls.
2011: Spun off the IPC BU to a new company-Ubiqconn Technology.
2012: Signed a Letter of Intent on healthcare business with NTT DATA Corporation.
2014: Ubiqconn is selected as In-vehicle System Provider for 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil.
2016: Expands its factory-installed products in Automotive solution.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website