So into You (Tamia song)

"So Into You" is a song performed by Canadian singer Tamia, recorded for her self-titled debut album Tamia (1998). It was written by Tamia, the duo of Tim Kelley and Bob Robinson (who also produced the song under the moniker Tim & Bob), Lionel Richie, and Ronald LaPread. "So Into You" is a mid-tempo R&B song with lyrics describing the protagonist's feelings of love for her partner. The song uses a modified sample from The Commodores single "Say Yeah" (1978). The song earned generally positive reviews from critics and was noted for Tamia's more restrained and seductive singing technique, at the time unheard of on her previously released material.
"So Into You" was released as the third single from the album on June 23, 1998. The song became an R&B hit, peaking at number seven on the US Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. The song's music video was created by Harvey White and premiered on American TV in June 1998. It reached the top ten on BET's video countdown and received a Directorial Debut of the Year nomination at the MVPA Awards. Since its release, "So Into You" has often been performed on Tamia's concerts and tours, including The Verizon Ladies First Tour in 2004 and the Single Ladies Tour in 2012.


== Background and release ==
In the early 1990s, Canadian singer Tamia was offered a record contract with Quincy Jones' Qwest Records and shortly thereafter started work on her debut album. While recording the album, several singles with Tamia as a featured performer were released, all gaining attention. Her debut single "You Put a Move on My Heart", "Slow Jams" (performed with Babyface, Portrait and Barry White) and "Missing You" (performed with Brandy, Chaka Khan and Gladys Knight) all earned Grammy Award nominations, making Tamia one of the most anticipated new R&B singers in the US.The publicity increased the expectations on Tamia's self-titled debut album Tamia which was released in April 1998. The album's release was preceded by its lead single "Imagination", which peaked at number 12 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, and "Falling for You" which was released as the album's second single in Japan only. "So Into You" was released as the album's third single on June 23, 1998. Fellow R&B singer Brandy originally recorded a demo version of "So Into You", with Mario Winans providing background vocals.


== Music video ==
A video for the single was made from May 16–19, 1998. The video starts with Tamia lying on a couch. Then, people are seen walking down a hallway (later revealed to be her friends), and enter Tamia's room. Then, it reveals that she and her friends were having a party. Several scenes later change to Tamia in several different rooms, singing the song. The video ends with Tamia's friends leaving, Tamia lying down on her bed, and then her standing in the center of a room. Nicole Richie plays one of Tamia's friends in this music video. The concept of the video was based on Tamia and Grant Hill (her future husband) having to be in a sort of long distance relationship at the beginning due to his travel.


== Track listings ==


== Credits and personnel ==
Credits adapted from the liner notes of Tamia.
Backing Vocals – Mario Winans
Lead Vocals, backing vocals, writing – Tamia
Mixing – Dave Wayy
Production, writing – Bob Robinson, Tim Kelley
Recording – Stephanie Gylden
Writing [sample] – Lionel Richie, Ronald LaPread


== Charts ==


== Covers and samples ==
In 2003, American rapper Fabolous sampled the song in his "Into You" (2003), with Tamia performing its hook. The song peaked at number four on the US Billboard Hot 100.
In 2016, Australian EDM duo Odd Mob along with vocalist Starley covered the song. The cover spent seven weeks at number one on the ARIA Club Tracks chart.
In 2016, Childish Gambino covered the song for Australian radio station Triple J's weekly segment Like a Version.
In 2017, Australian musician Nai Palm covered the song on her debut album Needle Paw.
In 2019, recording artist Chika covered the song as a reimagining with a female vocalist and a female love interest. It featured Charlie Wilson on background vocals. 


== References ==
NotesRubiner, Julia (2011). Contemporary Musicians: Profiles of the People in Music. Cengage Gale. ISBN 1414400969.References


== External links ==
Watch "So Into You" video on YouTube
Lyrics of this song at MetroLyrics