Rock-n-Roller

Rock 'n' Roller Coaster Starring Aerosmith is a dark steel enclosed launched roller coaster located at Disney's Hollywood Studios within Walt Disney World Resort. Manufactured by Vekoma, the enclosed roller coaster features linear motor electromagnetic technology, and the first of two installations opened at Walt Disney World Resort on July 29, 1999. It features recorded music and appearances from rock band Aerosmith. Rock 'n' Roller Coaster accelerates from 0 to 57 mph (92 km/h) in 2.8 seconds. Riders experience up to 5 G's (for comparison, a rocket launch is only 3 G's) and travel through three inversions, which include half-vertical loops, half-corkscrews, and a sea serpent roll.
A second installation, Rock 'n' Roller Coaster avec Aerosmith, opened at Walt Disney Studios Park within Disneyland Paris on March 16, 2002, and was considered the fastest roller coaster in France. The ride at Disneyland Paris closed on September 1, 2019 to be rethemed to an Iron Man/Avengers attraction as part of the Avengers Campus section of the park that will open in 2021.


== History ==
Construction on the ride in Florida began in February 1998, with cast member previews and a soft opening initially held in June 1999. The grand opening of the ride took place on July 29, 1999, with a special, invitation-only party, with Aerosmith as the guests of honor. Winners were taken to Disney's Hollywood Studios in stretch limousines and were treated to an all-you-can-eat buffet and bar. After a special performance by painter Denny Dent, winners got the chance to ride the roller coaster with one of the Aerosmith band members. At the exit of the ride, outside of the gift shop, there hangs a picture from the special event. The paintings Denny Dent made of the five band members hang in various employee office locations on Walt Disney World property.
The pre-show has changed from when the attraction first opened. Currently, band member Joe Perry would ask "Chris" to "grab my black Les Paul." A Disney cast member in the pre-show area would then pick up and remove a black guitar signed by Joe Perry from the set. The script uses the unisex name "Chris" so either a male or female could play the part. Although not used as often as when the ride first opened, the position is still used from time to time (generally, if the attraction is overstaffed). The film also includes a roadie saying "Hey Joe, I'll get it for ya" as a backup, in the event that a cast member is not available for the part.
The Walt Disney Studios Park version of the ride opened on March 16, 2002.In 2007, the queue was modified to accommodate single riders in addition to FASTPASS.
It was announced at the 2018 D23 Expo in Japan that the Walt Disney Studios Park variation of the ride will be closing for a complete theme change to the Iron Man and Avengers franchise as part of the opening of the Avengers Campus section of the park in 2021.


== Ride experience ==


=== Queue ===


==== Disney's Hollywood Studios ====
Guests begin the queue by entering G-Force Records  by entering a high ceiling circular room, where walls are decorated with ceiling-high guitars, the floor is decorated with a giant record and digital posters of Hollywood Records artists can be seen hanging on the walls; in Disney's Hollywood Studios, these digital posters sometimes display guests' names as recording artists, by utilizing short-range RFID scanners to read their MagicBands. Guests can also see a small exhibit of recording instruments, only in the stand-by queue; one name that can be seen is the organizer and presenter, whose name is Mike Rofone (microphone).
Guests are then called to wait outside the doors of Studio C before they can enter; different musical instruments can be heard outside Studio B as a rehearsal takes place inside. As guests enter Studio C, Aerosmith is working on a recording of "Walk This Way" without vocals in the studio with their sound engineer (played by Ken Marino). The band greets the guests before their manager (played by Illeana Douglas) walks in to tell them they have a concert to play on the other side of town and they can't stay with the guests any longer. Steven Tyler and Joe Perry express discontent with this outcome along with the rest of the band and claim that they can't race to the show by themselves without the guests. Their manager wonders what are they expecting her to do if they wanted to take them all with the band in which somehow Steven replies: "Wait a minute. I love that idea. How about some backstage passes?", to which he agrees to the idea and convinces their manager to give out backstage passes to their concert in order to make it happen. She reluctantly accepts and arranges for a "super stretch" to take guests to Aerosmith's concert. She then tells guests that a "really fast car" is waiting to take them to the show right outside the alley. As she's saying this, the limo that Aerosmith has boarded peels out, leaving their manager behind. Guests exit to the Lock 'n' Roll parking garage to board their limos, as "Walk This Way" plays again with vocals in the studio.


==== Walt Disney Studios Park ====
The Paris version is similar, except guests instead enter Tour de Force Records. The story of the Paris version is that Aerosmith, working with engineers, have created a revolutionary new music experience at the Tour De Force Records studios. After watching the pre-show which features Aerosmith's Steven Tyler hyping up the ride, guests are lured into the testing area where they board one of five Soundtrackers, the prototype vehicles for the new experience.


=== On-ride ===
As the ride vehicle leaves the boarding station, Bill St. James, the radio DJ for LA's Classic Rock Station, begins a short commentary, usually followed by a traffic report in the surrounding area where Aerosmith's concert is taking place. The limo stops in front of a highway tunnel where a highway sign flashes humorous messages like: "Traffic bug you? Then STEP on it!". (In the Paris version, instead of guests being taken on the Los Angeles freeways, the Paris version is based around an Aerosmith music video.) Building up anticipation, seconds before the limo is launched, Steven Tyler counts down from five, launching the limo from 0 to 57 mph (92 km/h) in less than 2.8 seconds at "one!". As the limo enters the tunnel the on-ride photo is taken and a selection of Aerosmith songs play.
After a long straightway, the limo proceeds to do a Roll Over (sea serpent) roll, 
which is a two inversion element, and then some less intense maneuvers. During the ride, there are neon signs on the side of the track, designed to mimic road signs; in the Paris version, lighting rigs, projectors, strobes, and smoke effects are used in place of the road signs that exist in the U.S. version. The limo continues along the track, until it reaches the third and final inversion, a corkscrew and ending the ride with a humpback. The limo proceeds to the VIP backstage area, where guests exit through the red carpet towards the on-ride photo screens at the gift shop.


=== Soundtrack ===


==== Disney's Hollywood Studios ====
Walt Disney Imagineering worked with Aerosmith to produce a special soundtrack for the roller coaster. Each coaster train features different Aerosmith songs, some containing some new lyrics written specifically for the attraction; for example, Love in an Elevator is sung as "Love in a roller coaster".

License plates and songs heard on each car:
1QKLIMO: "Nine Lives"
UGOBABE: "Love in an Elevator" (Rollercoaster) and "Walk This Way"
BUHBYE: "Young Lust", "F.I.N.E.*" and "Love in an Elevator" (Rollercoaster)
H8TRFFC: "Back in the Saddle" and "Dude (Looks Like a Lady)"
2FAST4U: "Sweet Emotion" (live, as featured in A Little South of Sanity)There is a 6th limo in the fleet that has no license plate and is always "in refurbishment." The vehicles are rotated in and out of use after a period of many thousands of laps around the track. However, the maintenance teams will switch out the plate and add the proper song to the new vehicle every time a rotation is made. The ride formerly featured Uncle Joe Benson, a well-known Los Angeles rock radio DJ, as the station's DJ. Bill St. James, former host of ABC Radio's Flashback, currently provides his own voice as the DJ of "LA's Classic Rock Station."


==== Walt Disney Studios Park ====
The vehicles in Paris were called "Soundtrackers" instead of limousines. A unique aspect of the Walt Disney Studios version is that each Soundtracker had its own theme. There were five different lightshows and five different soundtracks, one for each Soundtracker. The themes were as follows:

Soundtracker 1: green lightshow theme; played "Back In The Saddle" and "Dude Looks Like A Lady".
Soundtracker 2: purple lightshow theme; played "Young Lust," "F.I.N.E." and "Love In An Elevator."
Soundtracker 3: multicolour lightshow theme; played "Love In An Elevator" and "Walk This Way."
Soundtracker 4: red/yellow lightshow theme; played "Nine Lives."
Soundtracker 5: blue lightshow theme; played "Sweet Emotion (live)."The minimum height at Parc Walt Disney Studios was 1.2 metres (47 inches).
The ride opened on March 16th, 2002 and was closed on September 2nd, 2019.


== Hidden Mickeys ==

Attraction's exterior
A pattern of hidden Mickeys on Steven Tyler's shirt on the poster in the attraction's exterior.
Joe Perry's medallion on the poster in the attraction's exterior is a hidden Mickey.Queue
Two in the tile mosaic in the rotunda before the recording studio near the marble doors.
In the small exhibit on recording history.Pre-show
The carpet of Studio C has a pattern of hidden Mickeys.
On a small chalkboard in the bottom right corner of the sound room.
On the ground, formed by three coils of wire in the sound room.
After leaving the pre-show, to the right, before exiting to the ride area.Ride
On each limo's license plates, in place of each "Expiration Date".
On the track, one found on a yellow sign behind a red limo, two on the ground in the cityscape.


== Speakers ==
In each train, there are a total of 120 speakers. There are seven speakers per seat including one subwoofer (under the seat) and six located in the headrest. There are 820 speakers located in the ride's show building and launch area (not including the train). This makes a total of about 900 speakers in the attraction.


== See also ==
List of incidents at Walt Disney World - information on incidents and accidents involving the attraction.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Disney's Hollywood Studios Rock 'n' Roller Coaster website
Photos Magiques - Rock 'n' Roller Coaster avec Aerosmith