Red Hamill

Hamill is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

Aaron Hamill, Australian rules footballer
Alex Hamill (born 1961), Scottish footballer
Alex Hamill (footballer, born 1912), Scottish footballer
Billy Hamill, motorcycle speedway rider
Brendan Hamill (disambiguation), several people
Christine Hamill, mathematician
Christopher Hamill, lead singer of the 1980s pop group Kajagoogoo
Claire Hamill, singer-songwriter
David Hamill, Queensland Australian Labor Party politician
Desmond Hamill, British television reporter
Dorothy Hamill, figure skater
Harry Hamill, Australian rugby footballer
James A. Hamill, United States Democratic Party politician
Jim Hamill, singer with The Kingsmen and Oak Ridge Boys
Jamie Hamill, footballer
Joe Hamill, footballer
John Hamill, actor
John Hamill (baseball) (1860–1911), American baseball player
Kate Hamill actress and playwright
Matt Hamill, wrestler
Mark Hamill, actor
Micky Hamill, footballer
Pat Hamill (born 1950), Scottish footballer
Patrick Hamill, United States House of Representatives
Pete Hamill, American journalist and writer
Peter J. Hamill (c.1885–1930), New York assemblyman
Red Hamill (Robert George Hamill, born 1917), ice hockey player
Rob Hamill, New Zealand rower and political candidate whose brother was a victim of the Khmer Rouge
Tommy Hamill (disambiguation), several people
Zach Hamill, ice hockey player


== Name History ==
There are several surnames that are spelt Hamill but are unrelated:
Ó hÁdhmaill is an ancient Gaelic Irish clan. The name is now rendered most commonly as Hamill.
Some Scottish Hamill's are of Norman origin and are named after a location; Haineville or Henneville in Manche, France. Which itself was named from the Germanic personal name Hagano and the Old French ville for 'settlement'. Other Scottish Hamill's are of Irish origin above.
The English Hamill's of Saxon origin are named after a nickname from Middle English, and the Old English "hamel".


== See also ==
Hamel (disambiguation)
Hamill (film), a biographical film about deaf wrestler Matt Hamill
Hamill, South Dakota, a census-designated place in the United States of America.
Hammill, an alternate spelling.
Hamilton (name), an alternate spelling & a unique surname.
Ó hÁdhmaill, the ancient Irish Hamill.


== References ==