Udupi district

Udupi district in the Karnataka state of India was created in August 1997. The three northern Taluks Udupi, Kundapur and Karkala, were separated from Dakshina Kannada District to form Udupi district. Moodbidri was officially declared as new Taluk, separated from Karkala with effect from January 11, 2018. The district headquarters are in the city of Udupi.


== Location ==
Udupi district is surrounded by Uttara Kannada district in north, Dakshina Kannada district in southern direction. Shivamogga district borders on north east side and Chikkamagaluru district on east. Arabian sea is on west of Udupi district.


== Transportation ==
Udupi district is connected by road and railway line. The National highway 66 ( previously NH-17 )is the main highway road of Udupi district. National highway 169A connects this district with Thirthahalli in Shivamogga district but it is very narrow at many places and only mini buses and mini lorries are allowed on Agumbe ghat through which this national highway 169A passes.The national highway 169 ( previously NH 13 ) from Mangaluru to Shivamogga passes through Sanoor, Karkala, Bajagoli, Mudar of this district. There are few state highways(SH) built and maintained by Karnataka public works department (P.W.D.). Main District Roads (M.D.R) connect villages and towns of the district.
Konkan Railway connects Udupi with Goa, Maharshtra and Kerala states. Nandikoor, Padubidre, Udupi, Barkur, Kundapura and Baindur are few railway stations on Konkan railway line. There are trains from Udupi to state capital Bengaluru, Mangaluru, Kasargod ,Madgaon, Thane and Mumbai.


== Demographics ==
According to the 2011 census Udupi district has a population of 1,177,361, roughly equal to the nation of Timor-Leste or the US state of Rhode Island. This gives it a ranking of 403rd in India (out of a total of 640). The district has a population density of 304 inhabitants per square kilometre (790/sq mi). Its population growth rate over the decade 2001-2011 was 5.9%. Udupi has a sex ratio of 1093 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 86.29%. About 28% of the population lives in the urban areas.


== Climate ==
Udupi has a tropical climate.


== Commerce and industry ==
A thermal power plant has been set up at Nandikoor in Udupi district, with installed capacity of 1200 MW and a further 1600 MW proposed.
Suzlon has a manufacturing facility at Padubidre for making blades for wind mills. The project has been mired in controversies, with the company announcing a lock-out in November, 2017 that lasted for more than a month. Activities were again suspended in July, 2018.A strategic petroleum reserve is setup  at an underground location in the village of Padur ( Padoor ) village in the Udupi district.At Shivalli Industrial Estate in Manipal a few small scale industries have set up factories. There are few clay roof tiles (Mangalore tiles) industry, Cashew nut processing industry, Coconut oil mills and fish meal industry in Udupi district.  There are many small entrepreneurs who make Pickles, Happala ( Pappad ), Spices powder and other food products in this district. Prior to nationalisation of commercial banks and insurance companies in early 1960's the district had many private banks and insurance companies. Syndicate Bank, Corporation Bank and Canara Bank had genesis in this district ( then South Kanara district ) before independence of India from British in 1947 A.D.


== People from Udupi district ==
T. M. A. Pai
K. Shivaram Karanth
B. R. Shetty
Santosh Hegde
Kota Srinivas Poojary
V. Sunil Kumar
Deepika Padukone 
V S Acharya 
Guru Dutt 
Prakash Padukone
Pooja Hegde 
Ravi Shastri
K. Raghupati Bhat
Pramod Madhwaraj
Oscar Fernandes
Ramdas Pai
B.Vittalacharya
Harini (Kannada actress)
Raj Shetty 
Rakshit Shetty
Rishab Shetty
Upendra (actor)
Vinaya Prasad
Ravi Basrur
Dayanand Shetty (Inspector Daya CID serial)
Siddharth Basrur
Veerappa Moily


== See also ==
Udupi
Udupi cuisine
Dakshina Kannada
South Kanara (North) (Lok Sabha constituency)
South Kanara (South) (Lok Sabha constituency)
Kukkikatte
Mangalore
Manipal
Bankerkatta
Kuthpady
Malpe
Karkala
Tonse
St. Mary's Islands
Udyavara


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website of Udupi district