Udupi Krishna Temple

Udupi Sri Krishna Temple  is a famous Hindu temple dedicated to god Krishna and Dvaita Matha located in the city of Udupi in Karnataka, India.
The matha area resembles a living ashram, a holy place for daily devotion and living. Surrounding the Sri Krishna Temple are several temples namely the Udupi Anantheshwara Temple which is over a 1,000 years old.


== History ==

The Krishna Matha was founded by the Vaishnavite saint Jagadguru Shri Madhwacharya in the 13th century. He was the founder of the Dvaita school of Vedanta. It is believed that Madhwacharya found the Vigraha of Sri Krishna in a large ball of gopichandana. As told by Sri Madhwacharya, in his Tantrasara Sangraha, the Vigraha is placed Pashchimabhimukha(facing West). All the other Vigrahas in other Ashta mutts face west as well.  Devotees always have darshan of Lord Krishna through the inner window, known as Navagraha kindi & the outer window known as Kanakana kindi, which is decorated by an arch named after him. A statue has also been erected. A similar window covers the immediate front of the Vigraha and is called Navagraha kindi. It is often mistaken to be Kanakana kindi.The temple opens by 5.30 in the morning. The unique feature of the temple is that the deity is worshipped through the silver-plated window with nine holes (Navagraha kindi). The temple also offers prasadam (lunch) in the noon.


== Direct students of Madhwacharya ==
Direct students of Madhwacharya were many. His first disciple was Shri Sathya Theertha. All other mathas except the Ashta mathas were established by Sri Padmanabha Thirtha. His disciples do not have the right to perform pooja to Lord Udupi Shri Krishna as it is headed and governed by the Ashta mathas.
Sri Vamana Thirtha, Shiroor Math
Sri Rama Thirtha, Kaniyoor Matha
Sri Adokshaja Thirtha, Pejawara Matha
Sri Hrishikesha Thirtha, Palimaru Matha
Sri Narahari Thirtha, Adamaru Matha
Sri Janardhana Thirtha, Krishnapura Matha
Sri Upendra Thirtha, Puttige Matha
Sri Vishnu Thirtha, Sode Vadiraja Matha


== Krishna Matha ==
The daily sevas (offerings to god) and administration of the Krishna Mutt are managed by the Ashta Mathas (eight monasteries). Each of the Ashta Mathas performs temple management activities for two years in a cyclical order. They are collectively known as the Ashta Mathagalu in Kannada language.
The Krishna Matha is known throughout the world for its religious customs, traditions, and learning in Dvaita or Tatvavaada philosophy. It is also the centre of Daasa Sahitya, a form of literature that originated in Udupi.
These eight Mathas are Pejavara, Puttige, Palimaru, Adamaru, Sodhe, Kaniyooru, Shirur and Krishnapura.
The expenses of Udupi Krishna Matha are borne by the voluntary contribution of devotees and by Ashta matha's which manage the Krishna mutt. The contribution may be in cash or kind. The Krishna matha which owned large tracts of land lost all land due to the implementation of Land reforms act 1975 by the Government of Karnataka.
The Pauli of Krishna Matha was renovated and Brahmakalashotsava ceremony was held on the 18 May 2017.


=== Swamijis of the Ashta Mathas ===
The swamijis of the Ashta Mathas and their successors are given as below:


== Festivals ==
During the Paryaya festival, held every two years, the temple management is handed over to the next Matha. Each of the Mathas is headed by a Swami, who will be in charge of the temple during his Paryaya. The Paryaya is held on even years like 2008, 2010 and 2012. Festivals like Makara Sankranthi, Ratha Sapthami, Madhva Navami, Hanuman Jayanthi, Sri Krishna Janmashtami, Navarathi Mahotsava, Madhva Jayanti (Vijaya Dashami), Naraka Chathurdashi, Deepavali, Geetha Jayanthi etc. are celebrated very grandly by Paryaya Mutt every year.


== Gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		


== References ==


== External links ==
Sri Krishna Temple, Udupi
Temples in Udupi
Udupi Shri Krishna photos
Udupi Shri Krishna Temple and related information guide