Genesis Live at Wembley Stadium

Genesis Live at Wembley Stadium is a 2003 concert film featuring footage from three of the four sold out Genesis concerts at the titular London venue from 1 to 4 July 1987. It was first released in 1988 as The Invisible Touch Tour to very positive reception.
The bonus features include a photo gallery, scans of the tour programme, and a tour documentary first released on the 1987 home video Visible Touch. Some copies of the original VHS releases included a 3" CD of "Domino" from the video, indexed as two tracks ("In the Glow of the Night" and "The Last Domino").
The set list features six of the eight songs from Invisible Touch ("In Too Deep" was performed early on during the tour but later dropped and "Anything She Does" was not performed at any time). The DVD also features favourites from the previous two albums Genesis and Abacab. The oldest songs are "Turn It On Again" (here diverging into a medley of famous songs by other artists) and "Los Endos".
Another medley (of "In the Cage", "...In That Quiet Earth" and "Afterglow") was performed but never filmed. The film crew used this portion of the show to change camera tapes, without the knowledge of the band and to their subsequent dismay, at all three filmed shows. Some footage of "Apocalypse in 9/8 (Co-starring the Delicious Talents of Gabble Ratchet)," performed in place of "Afterglow" during the North American leg of the tour, can however be seen in the documentary portion.
 
Phil Collins' closing remark, "Thank your Royal Highnesses for coming," a reference to the presence of Charles and Diana in the audience, is edited out.
Performances of "Abacab" and "The Brazilian" from the Wembley gigs were later included as the B-sides of the "Invisible Touch (Live)" single; "Tonight, Tonight, Tonight" appeared as a B-side on the "Tell Me Why" CD single; "The Brazilian" appeared again on the 2000 compilation Genesis Archive 2: 1976-1992 and "Mama" and "That's All" appeared on the 1992 live album The Way We Walk, Volume One: The Shorts.


== Track listing ==
"Mama"
"Abacab"
"Domino (Part I: In the Glow of the Night; Part II: The Last Domino)"
"That's All"
"The Brazilian"
"Land of Confusion"
"Tonight, Tonight, Tonight"
"Throwing It All Away"
"Home by the Sea/Second Home by the Sea"
"Invisible Touch"
Drum Duet
"Los Endos"
"Turn It On Again, including the medley: Everybody Needs Somebody to Love/(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction/Twist and Shout/Reach Out (I'll Be There)/You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'/Pinball Wizard/In the Midnight Hour"


== Genesis ==
Phil Collins – drums, electronic percussion, lead vocals
Tony Banks – keyboards
Mike Rutherford – lead guitar, bass guitar, bass pedals, backing vocalswith:

Daryl Stuermer – bass guitar, guitar
Chester Thompson – drums, electronic percussion


== References ==