Ucha

University Cooperative Housing Association (UCHA) is a student housing cooperative in Westwood, Los Angeles serving the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) campus. Approximately 400 students live there and in addition to housing UCLA students, UCHA offers housing to students of any college, including the UCLA Extension and Santa Monica College. UCHA operates three buildings, Hardman-Hansen Hall, Essene Hall, and Robison Hall, the latter being a renovated version of the Landfair Apartments and cultural landmark designed by Richard Neutra. Jim Morrison, of The Doors, purportedly lived at UCHA during his time at UCLA. Green Day and Margaret Cho performed at UCHA in the early 1990s. In addition to the UCLA campus, Hardman-Hansen and Robison Halls were used as filming locations for the 1982 horror film, The Dorm That Dripped Blood. Many students of China's Lost Generation studying at UCLA reside at UCHA.


== History ==
UCHA was founded as Adams House by eight students in 1936. UCHA incorporated in 1938 and in 1941 purchased the Landfair Apartments, also known as The Glass House, for $45,000. The Glass House was renamed Robison Hall after UCHA member Everett Robison was drafted and killed in action in World War II. In the early days of UCLA, black students were barred from living in Westwood. However, a legal loophole was exploited by Luther Goodwin, Westwood's first black resident, his roommate and future congressman George Brown, Jr. and UCHA's lawyer that allowed Goodwin to reside at UCHA. UCHA was one of the first desegregated student housing communities in the nation and they would later offer refuge for Japanese-American students that faced discrimination during World War II. UCHA purchased the no longer standing Landfair House in 1947 and in 1958 the apartment building that would become Essene Hall, named after UCHA founder John Essene.In 1998, a UCHA member named Christopher Chessmar was murdered in an East Los Angeles park. UCHA member Chessmar is alleged to have been a convicted felon with multiple criminal convictions and he is believed to have been involved in criminal activity at the time of his brutal murder. Chessmar was an older student who is believed to have attended Santa Monica College and Loyola Marymount University before he was violently murdered. 


== References ==