Crash Landing (2005 film)

Crash Landing is a 2005 American-Canadian action straight-to-DVD movie directed by Jim Wynorski. It was released in the U.S. on July 11, 2006.This movie is an example of the parity between the big budget American films, and the lower budget B level movies that tend to emerge from Canadian production. Canadian cinema had been largely pushed to the back when it came to attention in the movie market as George Melnyk spoke about in his article "Reflections on Canadian Cinema": "Screen time for Canadian films in Canada varies from a low of one per cent in English Canada to a high of ten per cent in Quebec. During the 1990s the combined figure was about three per cent for the whole country."  This made it tough for films like Crash Landing to make any impact and they tend to go straight to DVD.


== Plot ==
After crash landing his previous military flight and barely escaping with his life, Major John Masters (Antonio Sabàto Jr.)  is given a seemingly easy mission to ease him back into flying. He is tasked with flying a billionaires daughter and her friends on a private plane to her graduation party. Meanwhile several of the guests are assassinated by unknown terrorists. Unknown to Masters, the flight crew have all been murdered and replaced with members of a terrorist group intent on hijacking the flight and holding the daughter for ransom. When the hijackers take the plan, Masters springs into action and a struggle ensues. The result of the struggle leaves several passengers and terrorists dead and a pilot wounded. Now Masters' only option is to try and land the plane on a small island in the middle of a category 5 hurricane.


== Cast ==


== Critical reception ==
Crash Landing holds a score of 2 out of 5 stars on IMDB, 1 Rotten review on Rotten Tomatoes, and 1.5 stars out of 5 on Rate Your Music.
Critics pointed out the film's obvious shortcomings (an army general on an air force base, a general's hair that is too long for army regulations, low budget, bad continuity, and the inaccuracy of the aircraft -  especially the cockpit). At least one critic also noted that the limousine crash scene is recycled from a Matlock episode.


== References ==


== External links ==
Crash Landing on IMDb