George Veazey Strong

George Veazey Strong (March 4, 1880 – January 10, 1946) was a U.S. Army general with the rank of major general, who is most famous for his service as commander of the Military Intelligence Corps during World War II.


== Early life ==
Strong was born on March 4, 1880, in Chicago, Illinois. Strong attended the Michigan Military Academy, graduating in 1900. Subsequently, he attended the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, and was a graduate of Class of 1904, in which many of his classmates also later became famous generals, for example: Joseph Stilwell, Lesley J. McNair, Robert C. Richardson, Jr., Jay Leland Benedict, Innis P. Swift, Henry Conger Pratt, Francis Honeycutt, Charles F. Thompson, Fulton Q. Gardner, George R. Allin, William Bryden, Walter R. Fulton, Pelham D. Glassford, Irving J. Phillipson, Donald C. Cubbison or Thomas M. Robins. He was also a graduate of Northwestern University Law School.
During World War I, Strong served overseas in France with American Expeditionary Forces. Strong served as lieutenant colonel on the staff of IV Corps of the Second United States Army during the Battle of Saint-Mihiel and for his staff service in this assignments, he was awarded with Army Distinguished Service Medal and later with two Purple Hearts.


=== Distinguished Service Medal Citation ===
The official U.S. Army citation for Strong's Distinguished Service Medal reads:

General Orders: War Department, General Orders No. 38 (1922)
Action Date: World War I
Name: George Veazey Strong
Service: Army
Rank: Lieutenant Colonel
Company: Headquarters
Division: 2d Army, American Expeditionary Forces
Citation: The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, July 9, 1918, takes pleasure in presenting the Army Distinguished Service Medal to Lieutenant Colonel (Judge Advocate General's Department) George Veazey Strong, United States Army, for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services to the Government of the United States, in a duty of great responsibility during World War I. While on staff duty with Headquarters, 4th Army Corps and Headquarters, 2d Army, American Expeditionary Forces, Lieutenant Colonel Strong was in charge of all troop movements preparatory to the St. Mihiel attack and immediately following this attack, and was also in charge of all troop movements from the 4th Army Corps in the Toul sector to the Argonne front. By his tireless energy, keen foresight, and sound judgment he perfected the multifarious duties whereby all of these movements were carried to successful completion. During this period his services were conspicuously efficient and contributed materially to the success of these operations.


== World War II ==
In 1940, Strong was appointed a commander of the 7th Corps Area and served in this capacity until May of next year, where he was reassigned to the VIII Corps as its commander. He succeeded general Walter Krueger, who has been promoted and transferred. Strong stayed in this capacity until 1942, where he was succeeded by Major General Daniel Isom Sultan.
Strong was chosen to become U.S. Army Deputy Chief of Staff for Intelligence (G-2). Major General Strong served in this capacity until January 1944, when he was succeeded by Major General Clayton Bissell. Subsequently, he was retired, but remained employed by the army and attached to the War Department. Strong finally retired in 1945 and died a year later at the age of 65.
For his service during World War II, he was awarded with Oak Leaf Cluster to his Army Distinguished Service Medal and Legion of Merit.


== Decorations ==
Here is Major General Strong's ribbon bar:


== References ==


== External links ==
Works by or about George Veazey Strong at Internet Archive