Big Thing (TV series)

Big Thing (Korean: 대물; Hanja: 大物; RR: Daemul) is a 2010 South Korean television drama based on manhwa artist Park In-kwon's comic Daemul, and stars Go Hyun-jung as Korea's first female president. Number one in its timeslot for 11 consecutive weeks, it gained successful ratings due to its cast and story arcs based on topical and controversial themes.


== Plot ==
Anchorwoman Seo Hye-rim (Go Hyun-jung), who gets fired while protesting about her husband's undeserved death, enters politics through the proposal of Kang Tae-san (Cha In-pyo), a member of the ruling party and a strong candidate for the next presidential elections. With the help of Ha Do-ya (Kwon Sang-woo) whom she's known since childhood, Seo becomes the first female president of Korea. With political pressure and threats of potential impeachment from her rival Kang and his allies, Seo faces the crises and challenges of her term.


== Cast ==
Go Hyun-jung as Seo Hye-rim
Kwon Sang-woo as Ha Do-ya
Cha In-pyo as Kang Tae-san
Lee Soo-kyung as Jang Se-jin
Park Geun-hyung as Jo Bae-ho (president of Democratic Party)
Lee Soon-jae as Baek Sung-min (former President)
Choi Il-hwa as Kim Myung-hwan (Tae-san's father-in-law)
Lee Jae-yong as Gong Sung-jo (Do-ya's boss)
Ahn Suk-hwan as Son Bon-shik (media director)
Im Hyun-sik as Ha Bong-do (Do-ya's father)
Lee Joo-shil as Yoon Myung-ja (Hye-rim's mother)
Kim Jae-bin as Park Dong-hwa (Hye-rim's son)
Seo Ji-young as Kim Ji-soo (Tae-san's wife, Myung-hwan's daughter)
Song Ok-sook as Madam Min - Min Kyung-woo (friend of Se-jin's mother)
Jang Young-nam as Wang Joong-ki (electoral specialist)
Park Ji-il as Chief of Staff
Kim Il-woo as Oh Jae-bong (Bae-ho's subordinate)
Yum Dong-hyun as Seo Soon-jae
Lee Moon-soo as Kim Tae-bong (corrupt senator)
Kim Jin-ho as Kim Hyun-gab (Tae-bong's subordinate)
Shin Seung-hwan as Kim Chul-gyu (Kim Tae-bong's son)
Yoon Joo-sang as Min Dong-ho (president of adversary party)
Goo Ji-sung as Park Myung-young (Do-ya's secretary)
Kim Joon-ho as Hwang Jae-man (killer)
Kim Tae-woo as Park Min-goo (Hye-rim's late husband) (cameo, ep 1)
Im Dong-yub as vice manager (cameo)
Rainbow as girlband (cameo, ep 5)


== Ratings ==
In the table below, the blue numbers represent the lowest ratings and the red numbers represent the highest ratings.Source: TNS Media Korea


== Awards and nominations ==


== International broadcast ==
In Japan, Fuji Television broadcast the drama under the title Lady President (レディプレジデント〜大物) from September 5 to October 24, 2011 on its Hanryū Alpha programming block.
In the Philippines, it aired on the GMA Network from August 15 to November 11, 2011, during its run, it received average viewership ratings of over 20%.
In Thailand, it aired on Modernine TV beginning 2011.
In Hong Kong, it aired on Television Broadcasts Limited under TVB Drama and TVB Jade.
In Taiwan, it aired on ETTV beginning August 2012.
In Indonesia, it aired on LBS TV beginning August 2013.


== References ==


== External links ==
Daemul official SBS website (in Korean)
Daemul at HanCinema
Daemul on IMDb