Angelina Maccarone

Angelina Maccarone is a German film director and writer.


== Personal life ==
Angelina Maccarone was born in Pulheim, Germany, 1965. A child of immigration, she is the daughter of an Italian father - who was also a guest worker - and a German mother who together moved to Germany in the 1960's. Maccarone originally sought a career in music before turning to film. She played the electric guitar and became a lyricist when she was 14 years old. In 1985, she attended the University of Hamburg and majored in German and American Studies.
Maccarone currently lives in Berlin with her partner, film editor Bettina Böhler.


== Career ==
Maccarone has been writing screenplays since 1992.
In that same year, she wrote a screenplay treatment that won the award of the Hamburg Department of Culture, which marked the beginning of her career in film-making. In 1995, Maccarone wrote the final screenplay for a movie with the same name as the treatment, which turned out to be the coming-out comedy Kommt Mausi raus?! With this film, she made her directorial debut and was nominated for the Telestar award. She then made another film in 1998 titled Alles wird gut, which also won an award, as it was the winner of Audience Awards in multiple cities, such as Los Angeles and Toronto. In 2005, Maccarone's feature-film Fremde Haut was released. It is about a gay Muslim woman fleeing from Iran to seek asylum in Germany, and it takes on topics regarding unclear and changing representations of identity as a lesbian Muslim woman. Filmed during the New Queer Cinema movement, Fremde Haut is also noted for its few moments of briefly portraying a lesbian relationship as powerful and free.; It proceeded to win the Jury Grand Prize at the International LGBT Festival in Montreal and the Jury Award for Best Narrative Feature at the Seattle L & G Film Festival.The next year, Maccarone directed and released Verfolgt, which was finished in Hamburg. Prior to its release, she stated "This will be a scandal." This is most likely due to the controversial plot, where a middle-aged female probation officer is seduced by a 17-year-old male teen in her charge. In 2011, Maccarone wrote and directed a documentary known as Charlotte Rampling: The Look. It tells the British actress' life story as it is revealed through a series of conversations that uncover details about Rampling's career and personal thoughts on life. It was presented at the annual Cannes Film Festival in 2011.


== Filmography ==
Kommt Mausi raus?!, 1995
Alles wird gut, 1998
Ein Engel schlägt zurück, 1998
Fremde Haut (Unveiled), 2005
Verfolgt (Hounded), 2006
Tatort: Wem Ehre gebürt, 2007
Vivere, 2007
Ein Mann, ein Fjord!, 2009
The Look, 2011
Polizeiruf 110: Hexenjagd, 2014


== Awards and Nominations ==
1992: Screenplay Treatment Award of the Hamburg Department of Culture - Kommt Mausi raus?!
1995: Nominated for the Telestar Award - Kommt Mausi raus?!
1997: Audience Awards in New York, Toronto, Los Angeles, Paris - Alles wird gut
1998: Honored at the Cologne Conference - Ein Engel schlägt zurück
2005: Hessian film award as "Best feature film" - Fremde Haut
2005: Jury Grand Prize at the International LGBT Festival in Montreal - Fremde Haut
2005: Jury Award for Best Narrative Feature at the Seattle L & G Film Festival - Fremde Haut
2006: Golden Leopard at the Locarno Film Festival - Verfolgt
2006: Best Feature Film at the Paris Lesbian and Feminist Film Festival - Fremde Haut
2007: Nominated for Best Narrative Feature at Tribeca Film Festival - Vivere
2012: Nominated for Best Documentary at German Film Awards - The Look


== Alles Wird Gut (Everything Will Be Fine) ==
Alles Wird Gut (Everything Will Be Fine), released in 1998, is a German comedy. Written by Angelina Maccarone and Fatima El-Tayeb, Everything Will Be Fine was the first German film since Toxi with Black German female protagonist. Additionally, it was the first German comedy with a non-white protagonist. The film aired on German TV and brought novelty to German film through its use of comedy to highlight racism. Maccarone drew from screwball comedy of the 1930s and took it back, made it witty, and “queered” it. Additionally, Everything Will Be Fine moved away from a “problem film”, one that accentuates strangeness, to a film that highlights black female protagonists who are self-sufficient and free. The black characters were not depicted as strangers or problems for the German nation through Maccarone’s ability to show the “everydayness” of black Germans. This is in stark contrast to Toxi, a 1952 German film, that highlights Toxi, a young black German girl, as a problem.
The film won the 1998 Best Feature Film Award at the Paris Lesbian and Feminist Film Festival.To offer a brief overview, Nabou, an outspoken Afro-German woman, wants nothing more than to win back her ex-girlfriend. Nabou begins to work as housekeeper for Kim, a workaholic who aims to become partner in an advertising agency.Cast:Nabou: Kati Studemann
Kim: Chantal de Freitas
Giuseppa: Isabella Parkinson
Kofi: Pierre Sanoussi-Bliss
Katja: Aglaia Szyszkowitz
Dieter: Uwe Rohde
Co-writer Fatima El-Tayeb comments on representation in Everything Will Be Fine:


== Charlotte Rampling: The Look (2011) ==
Charlotte Rampling: The Look is a 2011 documentary film about the life of the Charlotte Rampling, an English actress, model, and singer. The film delves into the life work of Rampling, who explains in an interview the difficulty of having to perform in films directed completely in languages other than English. Specifically, she notes how performing in various movies in France have allowed her to become completely fluent in French.Maccarone describes her desire for creating the documentary in an interview with Film Makers Live after submitting the film to the Cannes Film Festival in 2011. She states her passion and respect for Rampling, noting that the film was created "as a gift" and that she wished to look more in depth at how she worked, and her types of work she produced. She also notes that the film was ode to Rampling's courage, and wanted to use the film to get to know her better.


== See also ==
List of female film and television directors
List of lesbian filmmakers
List of LGBT-related films directed by women


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Presenting Alterity in Angelina Maccarone’s Fremde Haut (2005) and Tatort: Wem Ehre gebürt (2007)
An obscured view of Charlotte Rampling's career and life


== External links ==
Vivere Movie Site
Director's Portrait
Interview with Unveiled Director Angelina Maccarone, AfterEllen.com
Angelina Maccarone IMDb