Bobby Hoffman

Bobby "The Truth" Hoffman (born October 28, 1966) is a retired American mixed martial artist who competed in the heavyweight division. He is the former King of the Cage super heavyweight champion as well as the former King of the Cage heavyweight champion. Having made his professional debut in 1998, Hoffman has also formerly competed for the UFC, RINGS, and Jungle Fight. During his career, Hoffman defeated world champions Alistair Overeem and Ricco Rodriguez.


== Background ==
Hoffman found mixed martial arts, then known as "shootfighting", after being released from jail, spending 92 consecutive days in solitary confinement for assault charges. Hoffman, a talented wrestler and football player, attended Ellsworth Community College and the University of Akron before leaving college a year early to compete in the NFL for the Cleveland Browns. Hoffman spent half of a season with the team before being released. Two days out of jail, Hoffman attended a local fight and after the originally scheduled fighter did not show up, spectators were asked if they wanted to step in for the absent fighter. Hoffman accepted the challenge, and won the bout.


== Mixed martial arts ==


=== Early career ===
Hoffman compiled a professional record of 8-1 before making his debut for the SuperBrawl organization in Hawaii on September 7, 1999. After losing his first fight of the night against Josh Barnett via unanimous decision, Hoffman later defeated future Pride Heavyweight Championship contender, Heath Herring via unanimous decision and then knocked out future UFC heavyweight champion, Ricco Rodriguez. After following this up with two more wins, Hoffman was invited to compete for the RINGS organization in Japan.


=== RINGS ===
Hoffman made his RINGS debut, which was also his overseas debut, on February 26, 2000 in Tokyo, Japan at the RINGS: King of Kings 1999 final. Hoffman faced Georgia Olympic freestyle wrestling competitor, Zaza Tkeshelashvili, whom Hoffman defeated via knockout only 34 seconds into the fight. After compiling two more wins, Hoffman fought future Dream heavyweight champion, Strikeforce heavyweight champion, and K-1 World Grand Prix champion, Alistair Overeem at RINGS: Millennium Combine 2. Hoffman won via knockout at 9:39 of the first round. After winning his next four fights, two of which in the RINGS organization, Hoffman was invited to compete for the UFC.


=== UFC ===
Hoffman made his UFC debut against former UFC heavyweight champion, Maurice Smith at UFC 27 on September 22, 2000. Hoffman, who seemed to lack cardio and conditioning, lost the bout via unanimous decision. Eight days later, Hoffman won the RINGS USA: Rising Stars Tournament and then had two more fights with the Japan-based organization before returning to the UFC at UFC 30. Hoffman faced South African Mark Robinson and originally won the bout via knockout at 3:27 of the first round, but the decision was later changed to a no-contest as it was revealed that Hoffman failed a drug test for marijuana.Hoffman went 5-0-1 in his next six fights with wins in the RINGS organization against Mikhail Ilyukhin and Ryushi Yanagisawa, and also became the King of the Cage super heavyweight champion on June 23, 2001, after defeating Kauai Kupihea via submission due to punches. Hoffman was later stripped of his title after leaving the promotion, with the win over Ilyukhin being his next fight. After returning to King of the Cage and defeating wrestling star Tim Catalfo via submission due to punches, Hoffman returned to fight for the UFC at UFC 34 against Josh Barnett, who had defeated Hoffman earlier in his career via unanimous decision. Hoffman lost the bout via TKO at 4:25 of the second round in what was the first TKO/KO loss of his career. Both Hoffman and Barnett failed drug tests for the fight, Hoffman for marijuana, as he admittedly smoked it only hours before the fight, and Barnett for multiple banned substances. This would be Hoffman's last fight for the organization and Barnett would become the new UFC heavyweight champion before having his title stripped for another failed drug test.


=== Post-UFC ===
After spending over a year in prison for domestic abuse, Hoffman returned to mixed martial arts competition for the King of the Cage organization. Hoffman became the first King of the Cage heavyweight champion in his second fight back after a TKO win over Jason Godsey and then defended his title against Paul Buentello via unanimous decision. Hoffman then lost a rematch with Buentello, also losing his title, but would bounce back with two wins before being handed his next loss against Carlos Barreto in Hoffman's debut for the Jungle Fight organization in Brazil at Jungle Fight 2. Hoffman fought again for King of the Cage, against veteran Ruben "Warpath" Villareal, and won via armbar submission before returning to Brazil for a bout in Jungle Fight 3, which he lost via triangle-choke submission.
Hoffman lost a rematch with Eric Pele via TKO before facing Tony Bonello in Australia. After the first bout ended in a no-contest, the two had a rematch two months later again in Bonello's home-country of Australia which Bonello won via submission due to punches. Hoffman then bounced back with a win via triangle-choke submission a month later, before winning his last mixed martial arts fight via TKO only eight seconds into the first round.


== Personal life ==
Hoffman was dropped by manager Monte Cox after reportedly threatening to kill Cox's wife and children while Hoffman was fighting in Japan.Hoffman and his girlfriend, Patricia, wed the night after Hoffman's UFC 34 loss to Barnett. Weeks later on the night of their honeymoon, Hoffman, under the influence of alcohol and Vicodin, severely beat his wife. He was later arrested and spent over a year in a maximum-security prison in Shafter, California, for his actions. His wife, who was only 20 years old at the time and around 125 pounds, almost died as a result of her injuries and the two later divorced.


== Championships and accomplishments ==
Fighting Network RINGS
2000 Rising Stars Heavyweight Tournament winner
2001 RINGS Openweight Championship Tournament runner-up
Icon Sport
SuperBrawl 13 Heavyweight Tournament runner-up
King of the Cage
KOTC Super Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
KOTC Heavyweight Championship (1 time, first)
One successful title defense


== Mixed martial arts record ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Professional MMA record for Bobby Hoffman from Sherdog 
Bobby Hoffman at UFC