Cranmore railway station

Cranmore is the main railway station (and also the headquarters) of the preserved East Somerset Railway, in Somerset, England.


== Services ==
Various services are provided throughout the year, mainly in the spring, summer and autumn months to Mendip Vale. Occasionally, specials are run to Westbury. The station also occasionally receives railtours from further afield such as London. The station was opened in 1858 to serve the village of Cranmore.


== Facilities ==
The station originally consisted of just the station building located at the west end of the remaining platform (now a museum). The on-platform station house and main station building were both built during preservation and provide much better services to passengers. The station has a signal box located at the west end of the former down platform. This is currently non-operational. Behind it is a miniature railway which runs to Cranmore West. 
As the main station and home of the East Somerset Railway, Cranmore station also provides facilities for visitors:

Car parking
Children's play area
Picnic area
Restaurant
Toilets
Shop
Art gallery
Footpath to Cranmore West Station via the Engine ShedDisabled access to the platforms is available.


== Platform 2 Rebuild ==
During the station's heyday, Cranmore originally had two platforms, but with the closure in 1960s, the site became derelict. Platform 2 was demolished and was not rebuilt as part of the ESR's restoration at the time. However, with preserved traffic increasing (and as platform 1 is sometimes overcrowded during special events), the ESR does aim to rebuild the long-demolished platform 2, to reduce congestion and relieve Cranmore station). In April 2018, the ESR announced it had received £46,500 through National Lottery support, as part of a new upcoming project, aiming to rebuild and resurrect the down platform 2 along with its waiting room, which will be developed as an educational and interpretation centre, enabling volunteers and staff of the ESR to learn new skills and to display the rich history associated with the preserved line itself. Following the completion of this first phase it was announced in mid 2019 that the ESR had received a further grant of £58,700 from the National Lottery Fund to finish the second "down" platform and complete other works at Cranmore station.


== See also ==
East Somerset Railway


== References ==


== External links ==
East Somerset Railway website