St. John's University (Taiwan)

St. John's University (SJU; Chinese: 聖約翰科技大學) is a university in Tamsui District, New Taipei, Taiwan. It is the successor institution of the former St. John's University and St. Mary's Hall in Shanghai, two well-known education institutions founded in 1879 and 1918, respectively, by Bishop John Schereschewsky of the American Episcopal Church. SJU is accredited by ACCSB  and affiliates with CUAC and ACUCA.


== History ==
In 1952, the Chinese Communists forced St. John's University in Shanghai to give up its name and merge with other universities. In response to the loss of the school's identity, a group of distinguished alumni in Taiwan resolved to restore their alma mater in Taipei. In 1961, with the approval of the American Episcopal Church in Taiwan, the alumni of St. John's University, in conjunction with the alumnae of the former St. Mary's Hall of Shanghai, enthusiastically donated money to purchase land in the town of Tamsui in Taipei County for the school campus.In 1967, The Ministry of Education authorized the school to open as a five-year junior college of Industry and named it after its location, Hsin-pu (新埔). Nonetheless, its English name—St. John's & St. Mary's Institute of Technology—continued to honor the history and traditions of the alumni's two illustrious alma maters. In 1993, the school was accredited as an Institute of Business and Industry; and then, because of its excellent educational reputation, upgraded its status to an Institute of Technology in 1999. After decades of work to fulfill the aspirations of its alumni at home and abroad, the school's official Chinese name was changed on October 10, 2003, from 新埔技術學院 (Hsinpu Institute of Technology) to 聖約翰技術學院 (St. John's & St. Mary's Institute of Technology). On August 1, 2005, after constant and collective efforts, the school was officially upgraded to a University of Science and Technology, and was able to restore its original school name, St. John's University (SJU).
The founder of the school was Dr. James C. L. Wong, the first Chinese Bishop of the Taiwan Episcopal Church. Dr. Vivien Yen was the school's first president, and Bishop James C. L. Wong was its first board chairman. The succeeding chairpersons have been Dr. George K. C. Yeh( Acting Chair); Bishop James T. M. Pong; and, since 1972, Dr. Cecilia Koo. Past presidents, in addition to Dr. Yen, were Bishop James Pong, Professor William Yue-Jen Hsia, Dr. Yeh Chi-Tung, and Dr. Andrew C. Chang. Dr. Peter Tuen-Ho Yang has served as president since August 1, 2002.


== Academic departments ==
College of Engineering

Master's Program in Industrial Engineering and Management
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Department of Mechanical and Computer Aided Engineering
Graduate School of Automation and MechatronicsCollege of Electrical-Electronic and Computer Engineering

Master's Program in Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Master's Program in Electronic Engineering
Department of Electronic Engineering
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
Department of Computer and Communication EngineeringCollege of Business and Management

Department of Information Management
Department of Business Administration
Department of International Business
Department of Finance
Department of Marketing and Logistics Management
Department of Fashion Administration & Management (The first one and the only one fashion management department in Taiwan)College of Humanities and Social Sciences

Department of Applied English
Department of Digital Literature and Arts
Department of Leisure Sports and Health Management


== Research Laboratories ==


=== Precision Instrument Center ===
The Precision Instrument Center (PIC) of St. John's University was founded on April 26, 2006 with the purposes of improving teaching quality and promoting high-tech researching calibers. The PIC has integrated Opto-Mechatronics Research Center(OMRC) and High Speed Circuit Board(HSPCB) Research Center of this school, it is installed with valued instruments and equipment (Clean Room and Sputter are donated by alumnus) to support teaching and the R&D works for the academic and industrial users.
The PIC is part of the Department of Mechanical and Computer Aided Engineering; Dr. Rwei-Ching Chang is the dean.
Research Focus:
Education Programs Offered

Semiconductor Technology Program
Electric Properties Measuring and Testing Program
Physical Properties Measuring and Testing Program
Micro Mechatronical Technology Program
Nano Science and Technology Program
Semiconductor Equipment ProgramResearch Fields

High Dielectric oxidize Electric Characteristic Research of Silicon Semiconductor
Electric Characteristic and Etching Research of Porous Silicon
Printed Circuit Board Dielectric Material Characteristic Research
High Frequency Electric Circuit Designing
Cordless Reception System Making
Nano Technology Research
TFT Making and Analysis
Micro Mechatronical System Making and Analysis


== See also ==
List of universities in Taiwan
St. John's College, University of British Columbia, also founded by SJU alumni


== References ==


== External links ==
Official web site
Fashion Andministration and Management Department