Budgebudge

Budge Budge is a city and a municipality of South 24 Parganas district in the Indian State of West Bengal. It is a part of the area covered by Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA).


== History ==
Hindu dharmic leader Swami Vivekananda landed at Budge Budge ferry ghat in 1897 when he returned from his Chicago visit. The anniversary is still celebrated on 19 February with great zeal. The old station from where he boarded the train to Calcutta is decorated with flowers on this day. The waiting room where he rested for a while is preserved.
A curious feature of this old city is the large number of Sikhs who live here.
Budge Budge city was the site where the ship Komagata Maru was allowed to land following its return from Vancouver. The ship was chartered by a group of Sikhs to challenge the exclusion laws enacted by Canada to restrict Indian immigration. Upon entry into the harbour, the ship was stopped by a British gunboat, and the passengers were placed under guard. The government of the British Raj saw the men on the Komagata Maru not only as self-confessed lawbreakers, but also as dangerous political agitators. When the ship docked at Budge Budge city, the police went to arrest Baba Gurdit Singh and the 20 or so other men that they saw as leaders. He resisted arrest, a friend of his assaulted a policeman and a general riot ensued. Shots were fired and 19 of the passengers were killed. Some escaped, but the remainder were arrested and imprisoned or sent to their villages and kept under village arrest for the duration of the First World War. This incident became known as the Budge Budge Riot.
Historically the oldest people of this place were the 'Haldars' who came here to guard a fort near the bank of the River Ganges. A British writer who had come with Clive around 1740-50 chronicled this event. Maniklal was the main person at the fort and his soldiers lost to Clive's troops.


== Geography ==
Budge Budge city is located at 22°27′54″N 88°10′06″E. It has an average elevation of 9 metres (30 ft).
Budge Budge city is situated in the south-western suburbs of Kolkata, on the eastern bank of the Hooghly River. Over the past few years Budge Budge city has developed considerably in terms of lifestyle and infrastructure. With the ongoing projects like Calcutta Riverside, widening of the Budge Budge Trunk (BBT) road and the starting of the 7.7 km elevated corridor from Jinjira Bazar to Batanagar; the economy of this area is expected to get a major boost.


== Economics ==
Budge Budge owes much of its importance to the port, oil storage and jute mills. Being close to Kolkata and on the shores of Hooghly River river makes it a strategic location for oil storage and is the biggest oil storage for the metropolis Calcutta with big PSUs like Petroleum Wharves Budge Budge under Kolkata Port Trust (কলকাতা বন্দর প্রতিষ্ঠান). BPCL, HPCL, IOC having large units there. Jute mills were the biggest employers in the area till they started falling sick. Prominent among them are New Central Jute Mill and Budge Budge Jute Mills. At their height before 1971 these jute mills used to employ thousands of workers (New Central Jute Mills has been said to have employed as many as twenty thousand people) but after the partition of India and the subsequent creation of Bangladesh, supply of raw materials for these jute mills decreased. This, along with failure of trade unions lead to the closing of most of these jute mills.
The Budge Budge Thermal Power Station set up by CESC in Achipur (named after a Chinese called Achhu saheb by the locals who had established a sugar cane unit there) is a major source of electricity for Kolkata and its suburbs.


== Transport ==
Budge Budge is well connected by railway. Budge Budge railway station connects the city with Sealdah railway station by Sealdah–Budge Budge line which connects the metropolis of Kolkata with the rest of India. There are buses connecting Budge Budge to other parts of Kolkata. Apart from that both app based and non app based cab agencies provide transport services to Budge Budge. For transport inside the city three wheeled autorickshaws and manual rickshaws are good options.


== Demographics ==
As per the 2011 Census of India, Budge Budge city had a total population of 76,837, of which 39,510 were males and  37,327 were females. Population in the age group of 0 to 6 years was 6,946. The total number of literates in Budge Budge was 59,504 (77.44%). The effective literacy (7+) of population over 6 years of age was 85.14%. The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes population was 7,015 and 103 respectively. Budge Budge had a total of 18055 households as of 2011.As of 2001 Census of India, Budge Budge city had a total population of 75,465. Males constitute 55% of the population and females 45%. It has an average literacy rate of 70%, higher than the national average of 59.5%; with male literacy of 75% and female literacy of 64%. 10% of the population is under 6 years of age.


=== Kolkata Urban Agglomeration ===
The following Municipalities and census towns in South 24 Parganas district were part of Kolkata Urban Agglomeration in the 2011 census: Maheshtala (M), Joka (CT), Balarampur (CT), Chata Kalikapur (CT), Budge Budge (M), Nischintapur (CT), Uttar Raypur (CT), Pujali (M) and Rajpur Sonarpur (M).


== Civic Administration ==
There is a Budge Budge Municipality which is one of the oldest municipalities in the West Bengal. It is divided into 20 wards. As per 2015 municipal election, it is being controlled by the All India Trinamool Congress.


=== Police station ===
Budge Budge police station covers an area of 49.61 sq km and has jurisdiction over Budge Budge I CD block and Budge Budge and Pujali municipal areas.


== Education ==
Apart from the century-old schools Khariberia Vivekananda Vidhyapith (H.S.), Desbandhu Palli Seva Sangha Santosh Kumari Siksha Niketan High School (Durgapur), Budge Budge Uchcha Balika Vidyalaya, Budge Budge P.K. High School, Kalipur High School, Sarangabad High School, Jagweshwari Paathshaala, Subhash Girl High School, Shankpukur High School, Several English Medium Schools including the St. Stephen's School, Carmel School have been established. The oldest school of this locality is Sarangabad High School. The school was established in 1857, the same year when Calcutta University was founded. Noted philanthropist of the locality late Shri Anath Bandhu Mitra was instrumental for converting the small village school to a large institution. Shri Mitra was also founder of Jagweshwari Paathshaala High School, Arya Rishikul School, Bandhab Pathagar and Baikuntha Ashram. His able grandson Dr. Ramesh Chandra Basu carried the legacy and during his tenure as the secretary, Sarangabad High School had a through transformation to its present form. There is a college named Budge Budge College. There is an engineering college called Budge Budge Institute of Technology affiliated to West Bengal University of Technology (W.B.U.T.) offering B.Tech & Diploma courses on various engineering streams such as Computer Science & Engineering (CSE), Electronics & Communication Engineering (ECE), Electrical Engineering (EE), Mechanical Engineering (ME) and Civil Engineering (CE), along with MBA course. This institute is one of the best engineering college in Kolkata and has one of the biggest college campus in Kolkata. Every year the institute organises test-fest attended by several college students. There is also a B.B.I.T. Public School inside the college campus. Another private college,  Batanagar Institute of Engineering, Management & Science (BIEMS), offering various technical, management and basic science programs, is also in operation. Kalipur High School was established in 1919.
Budge Budge – Maheshtala region has also an organisation named as Budge Budge–Maheshtala Nature Study Centre which is a member organisation of Paschim Banga Vigyan Mancha and West Bengal Mountaineers and Trekkers Confederation. Over here, each year they organise the biggest Science Fair in and around Kolkata.
Khariberia Vivekananda Vidyapith (H.S.) is in its pace to become the first standard school of the town with almost 1500 students. The institution provides ample facilities of all science laboratories,  viz physics, chemistry, biology, geography, computer application and nutrition. The school is well equipped with a multi gym for the students and the staffs with a trained instructor. In the H.S. level subjects like education, political science, philosophy, economics, geography,computer application, physics, chemistry, biology, nutrition and mathematics are taught along with Bengali and English.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Budge Budge at Wikimedia Commons
List of reduplicated place names