Fiat Lux (film)

"Let there be light" is an English translation of the Hebrew יְהִי אוֹר (yehi 'or) found in Genesis 1:3 of the Torah, the first part of the Hebrew Bible.  In Old Testament translations of the phrase, translations include the Greek phrase γενηθήτω φῶς (genēthētō phōs) and the Latin phrases fiat lux and lux sit.


== Genesis 1 ==
The phrase comes from the third verse of the Book of Genesis. In the King James Bible, it reads, in context:


== Origin and etymology ==
In the Torah, the phrase in Genesis 1:3 which is typically translated in English as "let there be light" is in Hebrew וַיֹּאמֶר אֱלֹהִים, יְהִי אוֹר; ויְהִי אוֹר (wayyō’mer ’ĕlōhîm yəhî ’ôr wayəhî-’ôr).
In the Koine Greek Septuagint the phrase is translated "καὶ εἶπεν ὁ Θεός γενηθήτω φῶς καὶ ἐγένετο φῶς" — kaì eîpen ho Theós genēthḗtō phôs kaì egéneto phôs. Γενηθήτω is the imperative form of γίγνομαι, "to come into being".
The original Latinization of the Greek translation used in the Vetus Latina was lux sit ("light – let it exist" or "let light exist"), which has been used occasionally, although there is debate as to its accuracy.In the Latin Vulgate Bible, the Hebrew phrase יְהִי אוֹר is translated in Latin as fiat lux. In context, the translation is "dixitque Deus fiat lux et facta est lux" ("And said God let there be light, and there was light"). Literally, fiat lux would be translated as "let light be made" (fiat is the third person singular present passive subjunctive form of the verb facio, meaning "to do" or "to make"). The Douay–Rheims Bible translates the phrase, from the Vulgate, as "Be light made. And light was made."


== Use by educational institutions ==

Fiat lux or Sit lux appears in the motto and on the seals of a number of educational institutions, including:

Albion College (rendered as "Lux fiat")
Alfred University
Angelo State University
Atlantic Union College
Central Memorial High School
Clark University
Cornway College (rendered in English)
Dennis Memorial Grammar School, Onitsha, Nigeria
Dover Grammar School for Boys
Milwaukee Downer College (as "Sit lux")
Emmanuel College, University of Queensland
Ethical Culture Fieldston School, New York City
Fiat Lux Academe in Cavite, Philippines
Green Mountain College
Hartley College, Point Pedro, Sri Lanka
Hiram College
Jacksonville University, Jacksonville, Florida
Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina (rendered as "Sit Lux")
Kitsilano Secondary School, Vancouver, British Columbia
Kojonup District High School, Kojonup, Western Australia
Limerick Institute of Technology
Mayo College, Ajmer, India
Moeding College in Otse, Botswana
Monmouth College, Monmouth, Illinois (rendered as "Sit Lux")
Nelson McIntyre Collegiate
Queen's College (Barbados)
Rollins College
Selma University
St. Andrew's School, Bloemfontein
St. Joseph's College, Colombo
Tusculum College (rendered as "Sit Lux")
Union County College
University of Akron
University of California system
University of Lethbridge
University of Liverpool
University of Victoria (written in Hebrew)
University of Washington (rendered as "Lux sit")
University of Western States
Waynesburg University
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne, AustraliaFiat Lux also appears on the outside of Kerns Religious Life Center at Capital University in Columbus, Ohio. The second half of the same verse, Et facta est lux appears on the seal of Morehouse College.


== In literature ==

The English phrase concludes Isaac Asimov's The Last Question, symbolizing the godlike growth in power of an extremely advanced computer as it creates a new universe from the ashes of a dead one, drawing comparisons and suggesting an explanation for the biblical Book of Genesis.
Victor Hugo's novel Les Misérables (The Miserable Ones) speaks about the importance of daring and writes "That cry, 'Audace,' is a Fiat Lux!"
"Fiat Lux!" is the activating phrase in the setting of a Ward Major in Katherine Kurtz's novel series Chronicles of the Deryni.
The Fiat Lux Agency is the name of Nestor Burma's private detective agency, in Léo Malet's novel series New Mysteries of Paris.
One of the three main divisions of  Walter M. Miller, Jr.'s novel A Canticle for Leibowitz is titled "Fiat Lux".
Alexander Pope adapted the phrase in his epitaph for Isaac Newton, who made important advances in optics: "Nature and nature's laws lay hid in Night. / God said, 'Let Newton be!' and all was light."
"Fiat Lux" is also used in the 1982 novel Die Insel des zweiten Gesichts by Albert Vigoleis Thelen.


== References ==


== External links ==
Fiat Lux (film), Debevec.
Fiat Lux Assisi to Rome pilgrimage (film), UK, archived from the original on 2007-10-06.
Fiat Lux – Let There Be Lights (SCA, Kingdom of Lochac), NZ: Web centre.
Let There Be Light (PNG) (seal), Rollins College.
Smith, Howard, Let There Be Light.
Let there be light (annual outdoor art exhibit), Charlottesville, VA.
Masonic Lodge, Lombard, IL, AF & AM.