Matrix Games

Matrix Games is a publisher of PC games, specifically strategy games and wargames. They are based out of Epsom, Surrey (UK) with subsidiary offices in Arlington, Vermont, Milan, Italy and Edmonton, Alberta. Matrix Games/Slitherine also own and financially support the online game reviewing publication Wargamer.
Their focus is primarily but not exclusively on wargames and turn-based strategy. The product line-up also includes space sims (Starshatter: The Gathering Storm),  sports management sims (Maximum-Football), and real-time strategy titles (Close Combat: Cross of Iron).
Matrix Games publishes games from a variety of developers, including SSG, 2by3 Games, Panther Games, Koios Works, Destroyer Studios, Western-Civilization and AGEOD.


== History ==
Matrix Games was founded by David Heath in 1999 in Staten Island, New York City. As of January 2010, Matrix Games has published over 75 titles. Matrix has in-house artists, programmers, and producers which all take active roles in projects of smaller wargame developers who lack the resources to hire full-time staff otherwise.
In May 2010, Matrix Games and Slitherine announced a merger of the two companies making it the largest wargaming specialist publisher. Matrix Games pioneered the move into digital delivery, minimising costs to customers and providing them with an interactive environment.  They have signed some of the best known developers in the strategy / Wargaming market from established wargames developers like Gary Grigsby, John Tiller, Mark Walker, Don Gilman, Norm Korger, Panther Games, and Strategic Studies Group to innovators as well as classic titles from TalonSoft, Boku Strategy Games and the Close Combat series.

Matrix Games' involvement with the development of the products it publishes, they claim, is a key part of their philosophy, as stated on their website:The most important philosophy of our company is we love what we make. We're gamers first and then we take our love of games and put them into our products. The result has been a tremendous success.


== Awards ==
Awards won for Matrix Games products include:

PC Gamers Editors' Choice Award 93% for Korsun Pocket November 2003
Computer Games Magazine – Top 10 of 2005 for Star Chamber
Computer Gaming World – Wargame of the Year for Korsun Pocket 2003
Computer Gaming World – Wargame of the Year for Battles in Normandy 2004
32nd Annual Origins Awards 2006 Vanguard Award for World At War
32nd Annual Origins Awards 2006 Lock n' Load Band of Heroes
Charles S. Roberts Award 2007 for Guns of August
Charles S. Roberts Award 2007 for Empires in Arms


== Complete product line-up ==
Across the Dnepr: Korsun Pocket Add-on
Across the Dnepr: Second Edition
Advanced Tactics: Gold
Armada 2526
Armored Brigade
Banzai!: For Pacific Fighters
Battlefront
Battleground Europe – World War II Online
Battlegrounds: American Civil War
Battlegrounds: Napoleonic Wars
Battles in Italy
Battles In Normandy
Birth of America
Blitzkrieg: War in Europe 1939–1945
Campaign Series: Matrix Edition
Campaigns On The Danube
Carriers at War
Case Blue: For IL-2 or Forgotten Battles
Chariots of War
Close Combat: Cross of Iron
Close Combat: Modern Tactics
Close Combat: Wacht am Rhein
Close Combat: The Longest Day
Combined Arms: World War II
Command Ops: Battles from the Bulge
Command: Modern Air / Naval Operations
Commander – Europe at War Gold
Conquest! Medieval Realms
Conquest of the Aegean
Crown of Glory: Emperor's Edition
Distant Worlds
Empire in Arms: The Napoleonic Wars of 1805–1815
Field of Glory
Field of Glory – Rise of Rome
Field of Glory – Storm of Arrows
Flashpoint Germany
For Liberty!
Forge of Freedom: The American Civil War 1861–1865
Gary Grigsby's Eagle Day to Bombing the Reich
Gary Grigsby's War in the East: The German-Soviet War 1941–1945
Gary Grigsby's World At War
Gary Grigsby's World at War: A World Divided
Gates of Troy
Guns of August
Hannibal: Rome and Carthage in the Second Punic War designed by Forced March Games
Harpoon 3 – Advanced Naval Warfare
Highway to the Reich
Hired Guns: The Jagged Edge
Horse and Musket: Volume 1
Korsun Pocket
Legion Arena Gold
Lock 'n Load: Band of Heroes
Massive Assault
Maximum-Football
Norm Koger's The Operational Art of War III
Officers – The Matrix Edition
Operation Barbarossa – The Struggle for Russia
Pacific War: Matrix Edition
Panzer Command: Operation Winter Storm
Panzercorps: Wehrmacht
PureSim Baseball 2007
Reach for the Stars
Scourge of War: GETTYSBURG
Smugglers IV – Doomsday
Spartan
Star Chamber: The Harbinger Saga
Starshatter: The Gathering Storm
Starships Unlimited – Divided Galaxies
Starships Unlimited v3
Steel Panthers: World at War – Generals Edition
Storm over the Pacific
Supremacy: Four Paths To Power
The Last Days: For IL-2 Forgotten Battles
Tin Soldiers: Alexander the Great
Tin Soldiers: Julius Caesar
Titans of Steel: Warring Suns
UFO: Extraterrestrials
Uncommon Valor
War in Russia: Matrix Edition
War in the Pacific
War in the Pacific – Admiral's Edition
War Plan Orange: Dreadnoughts in the Pacific 1922–1930
World in Flames
World War One – La Grande Guerra
World War One Gold
World War II: General Commander
World War 2: Time of Wrath


== In development ==
Combined Arms: World War II
Mark H. Walker's Lock 'n Load: Heroes of Stalingrad


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Matrix Games at MobyGames