Robert A. Funk

Bob Funk Sr. is the co-founder and president, as well as a board member, of Express Employment Professionals, an employment agency company headquartered in Oklahoma City.  He owns various enterprises, including sports teams, through his Express subsidiaries and is a philanthropist who sits on the governing boards of several organizations.  He also served as chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank in Kansas City.


== Early life ==
Before founding Express Employment Professionals in 1983, Funk was a personnel consultant (1965) and vice president (1975) at ACME Personnel Services.  He is an alum of both Seattle Pacific University and the University of Edinburgh (Scotland). As a boy, Funk was interested in farming, entrepreneurship, and religion, even spending six months studying in a seminary in Scotland.


== Career ==
Funk is the Co-founder of, President, and Board Member of Express Employment Professionals, an employment agency company headquartered in Oklahoma City.  He owns various enterprises, including sports teams, through his Express subsidiaries and is a philanthropist who sits on the governing boards of several organizations.  He served as the chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank in Kansas City.


== Patron of the arts ==
As a hobby, Funk enjoys elk hunting and is a patron of the arts. While on a hunting trip in 1989 at Taylor Ranch in Colorado, Funk met the Montana sculptor Daniel Parker. After Funk discovered that Parker was a wildlife artist, he asked if he had any examples of his work to show him.  It just so happened that Parker had an elk bust sculpture called Perfection in his truck and, after showing it to Funk, a sale was consummated on the spot for the sculpture.  Parker would meet Funk again at the C. M. Russell Art Show in 1999 and some years later he suggested to Funk that he could design a sculpture of a Clydesdale horse to be given as an award to exemplary employees of Funk's Express Employment Professionals company in Oklahoma City.  A deal was struck between the two that resulted in Parker casting a 50-piece edition called Express Ranch Clydesdale. Over time, Funk has added several more Parker sculptures to his collection, including a monumental bronze elk sculpture for the entrance to his ranch.

Funk, who is a major donor to the western town exhibit called "Prosperity Junction" at the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City, said he hopes that the authentic late 19th century exhibit will help give something back to the community while giving the rest of the country a taste of the American West.


== Professional memberships and honors ==
(Source:) 
Oklahoma Hall of Fame, 2017
Man of the Year - IMPACT OKC Magazine, 2015
Champion Award - Oklahoma State University, Division Agriculture Sciences and Natural Resources, 2014
Most Admired CEO - Journal Record, 2013
International Franchise Association Hall of Fame, 2010
Oklahoma Affiliated Director of Blue Cross Blue Shield, 2009
Chairman of the Conference of Chairmen, Federal Reserve Bank System, 2007
Chairman of the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, serving the 10th district, 2006-2007
International Franchising Association (IFA), board member
IFA's Entrepreneur of the Year Award, 2000
IFA's Educational Foundation, board of trustees
Sales and Marketing Executives International (SMEI), board of trustees and charter honoree
SMEI Hall of Fame, inductee
National Association of Personnel Services Hall of Fame, inductee
Blue Cross Blue Shield, board member


== Community involvement ==
(Source:) 
National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum, chairman of the board of directors
Greater Oklahoma City Chamber, member and former chairman
Oklahoma Youth Expo, former chairman of the board of directors
Oklahoma Baptist University (OBU) board of trustees, member and former chairman
Business Affairs Committee at OBU, chairman
President’s Council at OBU, lifetime member
Business Advisory Council for Oklahoma Christian University of Science and Arts, member
Oklahoma Independent College Foundation, board member
Allied Arts Circle Club, member and former co-chairman
Prix de West Society, member and former chairman of the awards committee
The University of Edinburgh’s James Clerk Maxwell Patron’s Club, member


== Public policy and political polling ==
Express Employment Professionals also conducts polling on public policy issues and political candidates.


== References ==