The B Team (TV series)

SEAL Team is an American military action drama television series created by Benjamin Cavell. The series is produced by CBS Television Studios, and began airing on CBS on September 27, 2017.The series follows an elite unit of United States Navy SEALs portrayed by David Boreanaz, Max Thieriot, Jessica Paré, Neil Brown Jr., A. J. Buckley and Toni Trucks. On May 9, 2019, CBS renewed the series for a third season,  which premiered on October 2, 2019.


== Overview ==
The series follows Bravo Team, a sub-unit of the United States Naval Special Warfare Development Group, the most elite unit of Navy SEALs, as they plan and undertake dangerous missions worldwide with little notice, and the burden on them and their families.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
David Boreanaz as Master Chief Special Warfare OperatorA Jason Hayes a.k.a Bravo 1/1B, leader of a Navy SEAL team (Bravo Team) dealing with the recent loss of one of their own.  In the series pilot, Jason is referred to as a Senior Chief, but in "Collapse", he calls himself an "E-9" Master Chief. As seen in "Say Again Your Last" and "Never Out of the Fight", Master Chief Hayes is a highly decorated Navy SEAL whose awards and decorations include two Silver Stars, five Bronze Stars with a Combat "V", and two Purple Hearts.  During Season 3, Jason mentions that he enlisted in the Navy and completed BUD/s in 2001, just a few months before 9/11, and has spent his entire career fighting in the War on Terror.
Max Thieriot as Special Warfare Operator Second Class Clay Spenser a.k.a Bravo 6/6B, a second-generation Navy SEAL in training for Tier One status who is questioned as to his readiness for combat.  He becomes a member of Bravo Team at the end of "The Exchange", and briefly served as the team's second-in-command following Senior Chief Ray Perry's assignment to Green Team.  After being injured in "Paradise Lost", Clay returns home to the United States to recover, during which time he makes it his mission to ensure that a fellow Navy SEAL, now retired and suffering from traumatic brain injury, could receive a Purple Heart.  In "The Strength of the Wolf", Master Chief Hayes and Senior Chief Perry speculate that in 10 years, Clay will be leading Bravo Team.  As seen in "Never Out of the Fight", SO2 Spenser is a recipient of the Silver Star, four Bronze Stars with a Combat "V", and a Purple Heart.
Jessica Paré as Officer Amanda "Mandy" Ellis, Bravo Team's CIA liaison. Due to her actions of giving up the location of a CIA asset in "My Life For Yours," Mandy is demoted from her rank of officer and is now serving as an interrogator for the CIA.
Neil Brown Jr. as Senior Chief Special Warfare Operator Raymond "Ray" Perry a.k.a Bravo 2/2B, Jason's most trusted friend and the longest tenured member of the team.  At the end of Season 1, he was reassigned to Green Team but returned to Bravo in "The Worst of Conditions" at Jason's request during his leave of absence.  During Season 3, Ray learns that he has been selected for promotion to Master Chief, but after some consideration (including for financial reasons as well as to remain with Bravo Team), Ray decides to put in for a warrant officer commission.  As seen in "Never Out of the Fight", Senior Chief Perry is a recipient of the Silver Star and Bronze Star with a Combat "V", .
A. J. Buckley as Special Warfare Operator First Class Sonny Quinn a.k.a Bravo 3/3B, a loyal but sometimes volatile SEAL who is at his best in firefights and prefers them over a leadership position. As seen in "Never Out of the Fight", SO1 Quinn is a recipient of the Silver Star and three Bronze Stars with a Combat "V".
Toni Trucks as Ensign Lisa Davis, formerly Logistics Specialist First Class.  Earlier in her career, she was a Yeoman before becoming a logistics specialist.  In Season 2, she is accepted into Officer Candidate School and received her commission upon graduation in "Rock Bottom".  As of "Welcome to the Refuge", ENS Davis serves as a DEVGRU Intelligence Officer assigned primarily to Bravo Team.  As seen in "Payback", then-LS1 Davis is a recipient of the Navy & Marine Corps Commendation Medal, Joint Service Achievement Medal, Navy & Marine Corps Achievement Medal, and numerous unit, service, and campaign awards.
Judd Lormand as Lieutenant Commander Eric Blackburn, Bravo Team's commanding officer (recurring season 1; main season 2–present).


=== Recurring ===
Tyler Grey as Special Warfare Operator First Class Trent Sawyer a.k.a Bravo 4/4B, a member of Bravo Team who serves as a medic for the team. As seen in "Never Out of the Fight", SO1 Sawyer is a recipient of two Silver Stars, three Bronze Stars with a Combat "V", and two Purple Hearts.
Justin Melnick as Special Warfare Operator First Class Brock Reynolds a.k.a Bravo 5/5B, a member of Bravo Team and handler of the team's canine, Cerberus. As seen in "Never Out of the Fight", SO1 Reynolds is a recipient of the Silver Star and three Bronze Stars with a Combat "V".
Dita the Hair Missile as Cerberus, Bravo Team's canine.
Alona Tal as Stella Baxter, a grad student who becomes Clay's girlfriend in season 1, until she breaks up with him in season 2 episode 6, "Hold What You Got". She is then reintroduced in season 2 episode 21, "My Life for Yours".
Michaela McManus as Alana Hayes (seasons 1–2), Jason's estranged wife. She dies following a car accident in "The Worst of Conditions".
Kerri Medders as Emma Hayes, Jason and Alana's daughter.
Ammon Jacob Ford as Michael Hayes, Jason and Alana's son.
Parisa Fakhri as Naima Perry, Ray's Kurdish wife.
C. Thomas Howell as Ash Spenser, Clay's father and retired Senior Chief Special Warfare Operator who wrote a tell-it-all book.  In the later part of Season 2 and early part of Season 3, Clay convinces Ash to use his notoriety to champion the cause of awarding Purple Hearts to veterans with post-traumatic stress syndrome and traumatic brain injuries.
Scott Foxx as Senior Chief Special Warfare Operator Scott "Full Metal" Carter a.k.a Bravo 7, the former team leader in Alpha, who joins Bravo Team after Clay is injured in an explosion in "Paradise Lost". Foxx serves as one of the show's military advisors.
Steve Howey as Danny Cooper (season 1), a former member of SEAL Team 4 and Sonny's ex-teammate, medically retired after a bomb-related injury.  He and LS1 Lisa Davis had a romantic relationship.
Michael Irby as Master Chief Special Warfare Operator Adam Seaver (seasons 1–2), the Green Team SEAL trainer. In "The Worst of Conditions", Adam took over as Team Leader of Bravo Team during Master Chief Jason Hayes' leave of absence. He is killed in the line of duty in "Say Again Your Last".
Sharif Atkins as Senior Chief Special Warfare Operator Beau Fuller (season 1), the leader of Charlie Team. He and Jason came up the ranks together and have a longtime rivalry.
Daniel Briggs as Special Warfare Operator Derek Young (season 1), the Alpha Team second-in-command.
Darren Pettie as Paul Mulwray (season 1), a reporter in Afghanistan and son of the Secretary of Defense.
Dawn Olivieri as Amy Nelson (season 1), a private security specialist working on the Afghanistan base.
Jonathan Cake as Alan Cutter (season 1), the CEO of Xeon Tactical Security, a private security firm working on the Afghanistan base, former British Special Air Service officer and Amy Nelson's boss.
David DeSantos as Tim Belding (season 1), Mandy's CIA boss in Afghanistan.
Marsha Thomason as Sergeant Vanessa Ryan (season 1), a cultural support team soldier who works with the Bravo Team in Afghanistan.
Ruffin Prentiss as Summer Kairos (season 2), Bravo Team's new Explosives Ordinance Disposal technician.
Michael McGrady as Captain Harrington (season 2), the Commanding Officer of SEAL Team Six.
Mirelly Taylor as Rita Alfaro (season 2), a CISEN agent serving as Mandy's liaison for the team's operations in Mexico.
Felix Solis as Colonel Martinez (season 2), a Mexican Naval Infantry Corps colonel who conducts joint operations with Bravo Team in Mexico. Martinez is mortally wounded and dies in the Season 2 episode "Santa Muerte".
Bobby Daniel Rodriguez as Lieutenant Lopez (season 2), a hot-blooded Mexican Naval Infantry Corps lieutenant who is part of the Mexican joint strike force with Bravo Team.
Tony Curran as Senior Chief Special Warfare Operator Brett Swann (season 2), a retired veteran SEAL who formerly served with Bravo Team. He kills himself in "Medicate and Isolate" as a result of the V.A. doctors being unable to treat his Traumatic Brain Injury.
Jamie McShane as Captain Grayson Lindell (season 3), the new Commanding Officer of SEAL Team Six.
Emily Swallow as Dr. Natalie Pierce (season 3), a physiologist brought in by CAPT Lindell in order to study and hopefully improve the physical health and longevity of the SEALs.
Adelaide Kane as Rebecca Bowen (season 3).


== Episodes ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
On January 27, 2017, it was announced that CBS had given the receive a pilot order for the Navy SEAL project. The episode was written and author by Benjamin Cavell who were expected to executive produce alongside Ed Redlich, Sarah Timberman, Carl Beverly, Christopher Chulack. Production companies involved with the pilot include Chulack Productions, East 25 C, Timberman/Beverly Productions and CBS Television Studios. On May 12, 2017, CBS officially ordered the pilot to series. A few days later, it was announced that the series, now titled SEAL Team, would premiere by September 27, 2017 and air on Wednesdays at 9:00 P.M.
The series received a full-season order on October 12, 2017, bringing the first season to a total of 22 episodes. On March 27, 2018, CBS renewed the series for a second season which premiered on October 3, 2018. On May 22, 2018, it was reported that both Cavell and Redlich were exiting their roles as executive producer and showrunner, and John Glenn replacing him as showrunner.


=== Casting ===
On March 14, 2017 it was announced that Jim Caviezel would topline CBS' then-untitled Navy SEAL drama pilot but on March 22, 2017, it was announced that David Boreanaz had been cast in the pilot's lead role of Jason, replacing Caviezel. On March 8, 2017, it was reported that A.J. Buckley would play Sonny. On August 15, 2018 it was reported that Judd Lormand had been upgraded to series regular for season 2. On August 8, 2018, it was announced that Michael McGrady and Ruffin Prentiss would recur as Captain Harrington and Summer Kairos in the series' second season. On July 10, 2019, it was reported that Jamie McShane and Rudy Dobrev were cast in recurring roles for the third season. On August 7, 2019, Emily Swallow was cast in a recurring capacity for the third season.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 70% based on 23 reviews, with an average rating of 5.66/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "SEAL Team's solidly written first season offers compelling characters and hints at broader potential, even if it's somewhat undermined by an overall sense of predictability." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 57 out of 100 based on 16 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".


=== Ratings ===


=== Accolades ===


== Home media ==


== See also ==

Ultimate Force - Similar type of series but focused on the British Army's Special Air Service.
The Unit - Similar type of series but focused on the United States Army's Delta Force.
The Brave - Similar type of series but focused on a fictional Defense Intelligence Agency unit
Six
United States Navy SEALs in popular culture


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
SEAL Team on IMDb
SEAL Team at Rotten Tomatoes