Cardinal Gibbons High School (Fort Lauderdale, Florida)

Cardinal Gibbons High School, commonly known as Gibbons, is a private, Roman Catholic high school in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. CGHS was established in 1961 and was named after James Gibbons, the second Cardinal in the United States. CGHS is sponsored by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Miami and is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. The school is also the recipient of the U.S. Department of Education's Excellence in Education Award. CGHS has over 1,450 students from ninth to twelfth grade on its 26 acres (110,000 m2) campus in the residential area of Coral Ridge in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.


== History ==
Cardinal Gibbons was established in September 1961, by Coleman F. Carroll, who appointed Thomas A. Dennehy the first supervising principal, Marie Schramko, principal of the Girls' Division and Henry Mirowski, principal of the Boys' Division. CGHS opened its doors to 176 freshmen and sophomores on a campus with two buildings. In the following years, the addition of the eleventh and twelfth grades, an enlarged faculty, a field house, science wing, cafeteria, gym, and new classrooms led to the current ten buildings.
In 1972, the school became co-educational. On June 17, 1973, Joseph Huck was appointed to succeed Dennehy as supervising principal. From September 1974 to December 2002, Joseph J. Kershner served as supervising principal. Upon Kershner's retirement December 2, 2002, Paul D. Ott was appointed interim principal. His appointment as principal became effective July 1, 2003.


== CGHS today ==
In a campus-style setting are ten separate buildings, a gym that seats 1,337, American football and baseball fields, a quarter-mile track, and six tennis courts. There are 48 classrooms equipped with networked computers, a media center, computer lab, eight science labs, a music room, art and ceramic room and a chapel that seats 300. Renovation on the "C-wing" was recently completed and now the Wing hosts several technologically advanced science classrooms and labs. Accompanying these technological developments are the use of iPad's in classrooms with e-textbooks and digital notes.


== Academic and athletic merits ==
In 1987, CGHS was the recipient of the U.S. Department of Education's Excellence in Education Award. Only 271 schools throughout the United States and its territories received this award.Cardinal Gibbons fields 34 athletic teams and has won state titles in Competition Cheerleading, Boys' and Girls' Volleyball, Boys' and Girls' Tennis, Baseball, Wrestling, and Ice Hockey, most recently received the State Title for the 2014-2015 Boys' Basketball.


== Notable alumni ==
Donnell Bennett, Former NFL player (Kansas City Chiefs, Washington Redskins)
Jason Bostic, Former NFL player (Philadelphia Eagles, Buffalo Bills)
Josh Fogg, Former MLB player (Chicago White Sox, Pittsburgh Pirates, Colorado Rockies, Cincinnati Reds)
Taurean Green, Professional basketball
Tron LaFavor, Former NFL player (Chicago Bears). Transferred after his junior season.
Ryan Shealy, Former MLB player (Colorado Rockies, Kansas City Royals, Boston Red Sox)
Blair Walsh, NFL Kicker, Free Agent
RJ McIntosh, NFL defensive end, New York Giants


== Notes and references ==