Pinocchio (f(x) album)

Pinocchio is the first studio album and third overall physical release by South Korean girl group f(x), released on April 20, 2011 by SM Entertainment in South Korea.  The album was re-released as Hot Summer (Repackage Edition) on June 14, 2011 and contained the title track "Hot Summer" as well as two singles released in 2009, "La Cha Ta" and "Chu~♡", plus the previously-released "Is It Ok?".  Both versions of the album sold a total of almost 145,000 copies in South Korea.


== Composition ==
"LA chA TA" was f(x)'s debut song, and was released digitally on September 2, 2009.  Following their first live performance at the Samseong-dong Fashion Center on September 2, 2009, the music video was screened and released online the next day. The group's first broadcast performance of "La Cha Ta" was held on MBC's music show Show! Music Core on September 5, 2009. The music video for the song, released on September 2, 2009, featured the group members dancing on various theater-themed sets. They start by arriving and getting off a pink car and dancing in front of a lighted theater entrance during the night. As the song starts, members Victoria Song, Amber Liu and Sulli Choi enter the theater through the door while Luna and Krystal Jung stay behind to sing first two verses respectively. The scene shifts to individual sets. Amber, dressed as a ringmaster is on a dark stage with fire pits in front, red carpet beneath and huge hanging doors as decors at the back. Victoria, wearing a formal pink dress and jewelry, is in a room with glittering mauve-colored walls and posh pink and white hanging ornaments. Luna, wearing a golden dress, is walking up a black staircase leading to a crescent shaped shimmering golden seat. Sulli, dressed in casual form, is in a bedroom with blue walls, red carpet and a large teddy bear hanging from the wall. Krystal, dressed in formal black, is in a room with many hanging crystals and mirrors at the back. As song proceeds, girls discover that their rooms are connected and greet each other. As the song comes to an end the girls come out of the theater laughing and drive off in their car.
"Chu~♡" (Korean: 츄~♡) is dance-bubblegum pop song . It was released as a maxi-single on November 9, 2009 with the B-sides "Step to Me" and "You are My Destiny." It debuted in top 3 of the Gaon Singles Chart.
"Lollipop" was recorded in two versions.  The Chinese-language version features boyband M.I.C. and boyband Shinee in the Korean version. It uses an interpolation of the 1958 hit "Lollipop" written by Julius Dixson and Beverly Ross. The Chinese version was used for cellphone LG Lollipop in China and was not included on the album.  The music video was filmed in December 2009, and was released in January 2010."Pinocchio (Danger)" (피노키오; Pinokio) was the lead single used to promote Pinocchio. The song was released digitally on April 17, 2011, and an accompanying promotional music video was released through YouTube on April 19, 2011.  The music video shows f(x) dancing choreography by Jillian Meyers, her first work with f(x). The video features two dance sets, one with white carved walls, manual-rotating fans and pyramids on the floor and in the background, another one white set with swirling black and white, and five individual sets (one for each member). Victoria is in an orange room with different boxes, Amber is in a white room with black drawings, Luna] is in a red room with checkered red flooring, Sulli is in a hexagon blue-green and pink room, and Krystal is in a blue triangular room.
"Gangsta Boy", an album track, markedf the first time the Danish music producers and songwriters Thomas Troelsen and Mikkel Remee Sigvardt collaborated with f(x). Hong Ji-yoo also help writing the lyrics for the song.  It was performed with "Pinocchio (Danger)" during f(x)'s music show promotions of the album.
"Hot Summer" is a Korean cover of the song of the same title, originally recorded by the German band Monrose.  Like the 2009 singles "La Cha Ta" and "Chu~♡", it was included in the Hot Summer repackage of the album and was released as a single on June 14, 2011.


== Release and promotions ==


=== "Pinocchio (Danger)" ===
The full music video for "Pinocchio (Danger)" was released on April 19, 2011.  F(x) had their first live televised performance after a year-long hiatus through KBS's Music Bank on April 22, 2011. The song "Gangsta Boy" was chosen to be part of the special performance. "Pinocchio (Danger)" won a total of 8 music show awards: 3 on Inkigayo, 3 on M! Countdown and 2 on Music Bank, the first win was on April 29 in Music Bank. The promotions of "Pinocchio (Danger)" ended on May 29.


=== "Hot Summer" ===
The music video for "Hot Summer" was released on June 17 through S.M. Entertainment's official YouTube account.  The first performance of the song was on June 17, on the show Music Bank. The song won 2 music show awards: one on Inkigayo in June 26 and another on M! Countdown on June 30. The promotions of the song and album ended on July 10, on Inkigayo.


== Track listings ==


== Charts ==


=== Sales and certifications ===


== Release history ==


== References ==