Republic of New Afrika

The Republic of New Afrika (RNA), founded in 1968 as the Republic of New Africa (RNA), is a black nationalist organization and black separatist movement popularized by Black freedom fighter groups in the United States. The larger New Afrika movement in particular has three goals:

Creation of an independent Black-majority country situated in the Southeastern US, in the heart of an area of black-majority population.
Payment by the federal government of several billion dollars in reparations to African-American descendants of slaves for the damages inflicted on Africans and their descendants by chattel enslavement, Jim Crow laws, and modern-day forms of racism.
A referendum of all African Americans to determine their desires for citizenship; movement leaders say they were not offered a choice in this matter after emancipation in 1865 following the American Civil War.The vision for this country was first promulgated by the Malcolm X Society on March 31, 1968, at a Black Government Conference held in Detroit, Michigan. The conference participants drafted a constitution and declaration of independence. Its proponents lay claim to five Southern states: Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and South Carolina; and to the black-majority counties adjacent to this area in Arkansas, Texas, North Carolina, Tennessee and Florida.


== History ==
The Black Government Conference was convened by the Malcolm X Society and the Group on Advanced Leadership (GOAL), two influential Detroit-based black organizations with broad followings. The attendees produced a Declaration of Independence (signed by 100 conferees out of approximately 500), a constitution, and the framework for a provisional government. Robert F. Williams, a controversial human rights advocate then living in exile in China, was chosen as the first president of the provisional government; attorney Milton Henry (a student of Malcolm X's teachings) was named first vice president; and Betty Shabazz, widow of Malcolm X, served as second vice president.
The Provisional Government of the Republic of New Afrika (PG-RNA) advocated/advocates a form of cooperative economics through the building of New Communities—named after the Ujamaa concept promoted by Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere. It proposed militant self-defense through the building of local people's militias and a standing army to be called the Black Legion; and the building of racially based organizations to champion the right of self-determination for people of black African descent.
The organization was involved in numerous controversial issues. For example, it attempted to assist Oceanhill-Brownsville area in Brooklyn to secede from the United States during the 1968 conflict over control of public schools. Additionally, it was involved with shootouts at New Bethel Baptist Church in 1969 (during the one-year anniversary of the founding) and another in Jackson, Mississippi, in 1971. (It had announced that the capital of the Republic would be in Hinds County, Mississippi, located on a member's farm.) In the confrontations, law-enforcement officials were killed and injured. Organization members were prosecuted for the crimes.The US Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) listed the Republic of New Afrika as a seditious group due to its advocacy of secession. It conducted raids on its meetings, which led to violent confrontations. It repeatedly arrested and prosecuted certain RNA leaders noted above. The group was a target of the COINTELPRO operation by the FBI, as well as Red Squad activities of Michigan State Police and the Detroit Police Department, among other cities.


== Notable members ==
Betty Shabazz, widow of Malcolm X, was elected as second vice president of the first administration in 1968, working alongside Williams and Henry.
Chokwe Lumumba, formerly Edwin Finley Taliaferro of Detroit, was elected as second vice president in 1971. He later became an attorney, working in Michigan and Mississippi in public defense. After settling in Jackson, Mississippi, he was elected to the city council there. He was elected as mayor in 2013, dying in office in February 2014 of natural causes.
Milton Henry, also known as "Brother Gaidi Obadele," was one of the primary founders of the Republic of New Afrika. He was elected as the first vice president of the founding administration in 1968.
Robert F. Williams was a black nationalist elected as the first president of the Republic of New Afrika.
Monster Kody, former Eight Tray Crips gang leader, currently incarcerated at Centinela State Prison.


=== Leaders ===
Robert F. Williams, President in Exile (1968–1971)
Imari Obadele, President (1971–1991)


== Publications ==


== See also ==
Bantustan
Black Belt (U.S. region), social and demographic crescent of southern counties that contain higher than average percentages of African-American residents
Black Power
David Duke, American white supremacist who advocates for partitioning the United States along racial lines
Harry Haywood
Malcolm X
Northwest Territorial Imperative, a white nationalist idea involving the creation of a white-only state in the Pacific Northwest
Queen Mother Moore
Sanyika Shakur
Mutulu Shakur
Robert F. Williams


== References ==


== External links ==


=== RNA links ===
Provisional Government – Republic of New Afrika (Official Web Site)
The Republic of New Afrika
New Afrika (Online Blog)


=== Archives ===
RNA documents in the Freedom Now! archival project at Brown University – Tougaloo College archives.
The Republic of New Africa vs. the United States, 1967–1974, documents on police surveillance and repression of the RNA as well as protest by the organization at the Radical Information Project.


=== Articles and reports ===
Firing Line: The Republic of New Africa] William F. Buckley interviews Milton Henry, President of the Republic of New Afrika. Program number 126. Taped on Nov 18, 1968 (New York City, NY). 50 minutes.  Available from the Hoover Institution.  The first 5 minutes are accessible in streaming RealAudio.
Understanding Covert Repressive Action: The Case of the US Government Against the Republic of New Africa by Christian Davenport, Professor of Peace Studies and Political Science at the Kroc Institute, University of Notre Dame.
The Real Republic of New Africa By Dennis Smith, News Director. February 3, 2005. Accessed April 1, 2005