Université de Sherbrooke

The Université de Sherbrooke is a large public French-language university in Quebec, Canada with campuses located in Sherbrooke and Longueuil, a suburb of Montreal approximately 130 km (81 mi) west of Sherbrooke. It is one of two universities in the Estrie region of Quebec, and the only French-language university for the region.
In 2007, the Université de Sherbrooke was home to 40,000 students and a teaching staff of 3,200. In all, it employs 6,400 people. The university has over 100,000 graduates and offers 46 undergraduate, 48 master's and 27 doctoral programs. It holds a total of 61 research chairs, among which are the pharmacology, microelectronics, statistical learning, and environment research chairs.


== Campus ==
The Université de Sherbrooke has five campuses:

The Main Sherbrooke Campus
The Sherbrooke Health Campus
The Longueuil Campus
The Joint Campus in Saguenay (on the site of the Université du Québec à Chicoutimi)
The Joint Campus in Moncton (on the site of the Université de Moncton, in Moncton, New Brunswick).


== History ==
The Université de Sherbrooke was established in 1954 as a French-speaking Catholic university in a region that was predominantly English speaking. Initially there was a religious component to the pedagogical activities, but by the end of the 1960s the number of priests working for the university had greatly diminished. In 1975, the appointment of a layman as Rector marked the end of religious activity in the institution. The Department of Theology is still officially Roman Catholic, alone in Quebec in this regard.
Université de Sherbrooke's arms, supporters, flag and badge were registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority on January 15, 2004. Université de Sherbrooke's crest and Supporters were registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority on April 20, 2007. The motto of the school is Veritatem in Charitate ("Truth through charity").
In 2006, the university opened a branch of its medical facility on the campus of UQAC, where its students enroll for non-medical courses. The number of students attending the Université de Sherbrooke continues to rise and the university has worked with the City of Sherbrooke to respond to the increase. Activities at the Université de Sherbrooke are mainly centred on teaching and research.


== Rectors ==
2017–present: Pierre Cossette
2009–2017: Luce Samoisette
2001–2009: Bruno-Marie Béchard Marinier
1993–2001: Pierre Reid
1985–1993: Aldée Cabana
1981–1985: Claude Hamel
1975–1981: Yves Martin
1965–1975: Mgr. Roger Maltais
1955–1965: Mgr. Irénée Pinard
1954–1955: Mgr. Maurice Vincent


== Institutions ==

The Université de Sherbrooke is composed of the following faculties:

Faculty of Administration
Faculty of Education
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Letters and Humanities
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
Faculty of Sports and Physical Education
Faculty of Science
Faculty of Theology, Ethics and PhilosophyThe Main Sherbrooke Campus includes:

Administration
Support services
Most faculties
The George-Cabana Pavilion (central pavilion)
The Multifunctional Pavilion
The Univestrie Pavilion (sports centre)
The Cultural Centre and Maurice-O'Bready Theatre
The Humanities Library
The Law and Government Publications Library
The Music Library
The Science and Engineering Library
The Documentation Centre
The Anne-Hébert Centre
The Pedagogical Resource Centre
The Jean-Marie Roy Map Library
Student residencesThe Sherbrooke Health Campus includes:

The Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
The Institute of Pharmacology of Sherbrooke
The Sherbrooke University Hospital
The Centre for Clinical Research
The Biotechnology Research Centre in Estrie
The Gérald-La Salle Pavilion
The Health Sciences Library
The Pavillon de Recherche Appliquée sur le Cancer (PRAC)
A sports centre
Student residencesThe Longueuil Campus was founded in 1989. Today it offers more than 90 educational programs, primarily at the master's level, in eight of the nine faculties of the university (Administration; Education; Engineering; Law; Letters and Humanities; Medicine and Health Sciences; Science; Theology, Ethics and Philosophy). Whether at the undergraduate or graduate level, most programs are offered on a part-time basis on evenings and weekends, or in various intensive formats to allow professionals to remain in the work force.
The Longueuil Campus hosts the applied research projects of its faculties along with others conducted in collaboration with Charles LeMoyne Hospital, an affiliated regional and university centre located in the Montérégie region. The campus is located on Montreal's South Shore across from the Longueuil-Université-de-Sherbrooke subway station.
The Joint Campus in Saguenay opened its doors in 1996 to medical students.
Also opening in 1996, the Joint Campus in Moncton, New Brunswick, offers medical training to French-speaking students.


== Programs ==

The University of Sherbrooke offers a variety of bachelors, masters, doctoral and post-doctoral programs as well as various certificates and microprograms.
The Faculty of Theology, Ethics and Philosophy offers Undergraduate level certificate, diploma, Bachelors, Masters and Doctorate degrees in Theology/Theological Studies; Doctorate Theology and Religious Vocations; and Undergraduate level certificate/diploma/Graduate level certificate/diploma Pastoral Studies/Counselling.
The Faculty of Engineering offers courses in the following specialties: Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering, Biological Engineering and Mechanical Engineering.


== Sports ==
Sports teams representing the Université de Sherbrooke are called Le Vert & Or (called The Green and Gold in English).


== Media ==
The university publishes the magazine UdeS, which has a circulation of 85,000 copies. Published three times a year by the Communications Service, this magazine is distributed free to everyone in the central graduate database and to staff as well as friends of the institution. Copies are also distributed in a number of locations in Sherbrooke.
The university's student community puts out a student newspaper, the Collectif, and operates an FM radio station, CFAK-FM.


== Ranking ==
Université de Sherbrooke has placed in several international post-secondary school rankings. In the 2019 Academic Ranking of World Universities rankings, the university ranked 701–800 in the world. The 2020 Times Higher Education World University Rankings placed 601–800 in the world. The 2020 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 651–700 in the world and sixth in Canada. In U.S. News & World Report 2020 global university rankings, the university placed 722nd.The university has also placed in post-secondary national rankings, including the 2020 rankings published by Maclean's, which ranked Sherbrooke thirteenth in their Medical-Doctoral university category, and 20th in their reputation ranking for Canadian universities.


== Associations and student groups ==
There are many associations and student groups at the University of Sherbrooke.

ADEEPL'association des étudiantes et étudiants en pharmacologie. This association is a group for the pharmacology students, founded in 2007.

FEUSFounded in 1955, the Fédération étudiante de l’Université de Sherbrooke represents all undergraduate students in the university. With 10 member associations and over 13,000 student members, it is one of the most important lobby groups in the Estrie region. It is a member of several external organizations, having formerly been affiliated with the Fédération étudiante universitaire du Québec (FEUQ), the Quebec Federation of University Students. As of 2016, it is not part of a province wide student organisation.

AGEFLESHFounded in 1993, the Association générale des étudiants de la Faculté des lettres et sciences humaines de l’Université de Sherbrooke represents students in the Faculty of Letters and Humanities. It participated in the student strike movement against the $103 million in cuts to student financial assistance in the spring of 2005.
Since 2005, when it was accredited as sole representative of all students in the faculty, the association has fought against the monopoly held by a food-distribution company on the Sherbrooke Main Campus. It is preparing a business plan to set up a student cooperative cafe in the faculty.

AGEEMUSFounded in 1969, the Association générale des étudiants en médecine de l’Université de Sherbrooke represents medical students attending the university's various satellite campuses (Longueuil, Chicoutimi, Moncton).

AGEDThe Association générale des étudiants en droit of the Université de Sherbrooke represents students in the Faculty of Law.

AGEGThe Association générale des étudiants de génie of the Université de Sherbrooke represents students in the Faculty of Engineering.

AGERThe Association générale des étudiants de réadaptation of the Université de Sherbrooke represents undergraduates in occupational therapy and physiotherapy.

AETEPThe Association des étudiants en théologie, éthique et philosophie of the Université de Sherbrooke represents students in the Faculty of Theology, Ethics and Philosophy.

AGESFounded in 1959, the Association générale des étudiants en sciences of the Université de Sherbrooke represents students in the Faculty of Science. On March 17, 2010, the AGES won the Continuity Prize awarded by the FEUS at the Défi Étudiant for their 51 years of service.

AGEEFEUSThe Association générale des étudiants de la Faculté d'éducation de l’Université de Sherbrooke represents undergraduate students in the Faculty of Education and is a member of FEUS.

AGEMDEUSThe Association générale des étudiants de la maîtrise et du doctorat de la Faculté d'éducation de l’Université de Sherbrooke represents graduate students in the Faculty of Education. AGEMDEUS has over 400 members and is a member of REMDUS.

AEFAThe Association des étudiants de la Faculté d'administration of the Université de Sherbrooke represents students in the Faculty of Administration. This group is also an umbrella organisation for some of the other student associations. The COMITÉ CA represents people studying to be a Chartered Accountant. The COMITÉ CMA is represents Chartered Management Accountant students, and the COMITÉ CGA represents students taking a GCA degree.
FONDS ÉQUINOX represents students in finance. The people in Marketing are represented by the student association Markus. The human resources students have a group named GERHUS. RÉGIS is the association for people studying in managing information systems.
AGEESIUSThe Association des étudiants en science infirmière de l’Université de Sherbrooke represents students in nursing science.

AGEEPThe Association des étudiants en éducation physique of the Université de Sherbrooke represents students in the Faculty of Sports and Physical Education.

RECMUSRegroupement des étudiants chercheurs en médecine de l'Université de Sherbrooke is a group for medical students.

RECPUSThe Regroupement des étudiants chercheurs en pharmacologie de l’Université de Sherbrooke represents pharmacology research students.

RECSEPThe Regroupement des étudiants de cycles supérieurs en études politiques represents political science students.

RECSUSThe Regroupement étudiant des chercheurs et chercheuses en sciences de l'Université de Sherbrooke represents graduate students from the Faculty of Sciences.

REMDUSThe Regroupement des étudiants en maîtrise et doctorat de l’Université de Sherbrooke represents all of the university's graduate students. It is affiliated with FEUQ, the Quebec Federation of University Students.


== Notable faculty ==
Roger Côté, Former Director of the Department of Pathology, Inceptor and Chair of the Editorial Board of the Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine, the largest international clinical nomenclature hosted by the International Healthcare Terminology Standards Development Organisation (IHTSDO) since 2006.
Esteban Chornet, Professor of Chemical Engineering, Canadian entrepreneur and inventor. 2004 Recipient of the Prix Lionel-Boulet award by the Government of Quebec.
André Lussier, Professor emeritus and pioneer of clinical rheumatology in Canada.
Gilles Pigeon, former Dean of Medicine, 1991 recipient of the Duncan-Graham Award of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, Officer of the National Order of Quebec, and of the Ordre des Palmes académiques (an order of chivalry of France awarded to academics and educators).
Pierre Deslongchamps, Professor emeritus and a leading organic chemist on the international scene.
Louis Taillefer, Professor of Physics, Canada Research Chair in Quantum Materials. 2011 recipient of the Order of Canada for his work on understanding the behavior of electrons in matter.


== Notable alumni ==

Former Quebec Premier Jean Charest
Camille Leblanc-Bazinet - Fittest Woman on Earth, 2014 Reebok Crossfit Games
Jean-Christophe Beaulieu, Canadian football player
Sylvain Charlebois, Research Director, Canadian researcher in food distribution and policy, columnist, La Presse and The Globe and Mail, Dalhousie University
Charles Sirois, Canadian businessman


== Commemorative stamp ==
On 4 May 2004 Canada Post issued 'Sherbrooke University, 1954-2004 / Université de Sherbrooke, 1954-2004' as part of the Canadian Universities series. The stamp was based on a design by Denis L'Allier and on a photograph by Guy Lavigueur. The 49¢ stamps are perforated 13.5 and were printed by Canadian Bank Note Company.


== See also ==

Bishop's University
List of Quebec universities
Higher education in Quebec
Canadian Interuniversity Sport
Canadian government scientific research organizations
Canadian university scientific research organizations
Canadian industrial research and development organizations


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Fédération étudiante de l'Université de Sherbrooke (in French)