Udaya Pictures

Udaya Pictures is the oldest film production studio in the Malayalam film industry of India. It was established in 1947 by director-producer Kunchacko (1912–1976) and film distributor K. V. Koshy in Pathirappally, Alappuzha in Kerala.  The studio influenced the gradual shift of Malayalam film industry from its original base of Madras, Tamil Nadu to Kerala, now considered a milestone in the history of Malayalam film industry. The first film of the studio was Vellinakshatram (1949).The films produced at the studio were produced under the banner of K & K Combines, and later under Excel Productions (also spelt X. L. Productions). Udaya's professional rivalry with P. Subramaniam's Merryland Studio was quite famous.


== History ==
Kunchacko established a film production company named Udaya Pictures in 1947, though he continued production at traditional the base of Malayalam film, Chennai, but it all changed in 1947 when he came together with film distributor K. V. Koshy and established Udaya Studios in Alleppey (Alappuzha), and in time the studio also set up its own distribution network. Soon it had a string of successes with blockbusters based on Vadakkan Pattu.

Unniyarcha (1961)
Palattukoman (1962)
Othenante Makan (1970)
Aromalunni (1972)
Ponnapuram Kotta (1973)
Thumbolarcha (1974)
Kannappanunni (1977)
Palattu Kunjikannan (1980)After Kunchako's death in 1976, his son, director Boban Kunchacko, took over the functioning, but after his death in 2004 at the age of 55, the studio saw some bad days. 
However, Dr. Avinash Unnithan (Suryamangalam Group) has purchased the plot where the studio was located and another studio under a different name is in preparation to be set up, like an air-conditioned shooting floor and other facilities attached to it, but also taking utmost care to preserve the old structures, thereby keeping alive the nostalgic feel of the place.
The legendary Udaya Pictures banner is still owned by famous cine actor Kunchacko Boban, who is also the grandson of Kunchacko. Udaya has made a comeback after 30 years by producing the movie Kocchavva Paulo Ayyappa Coelho.


== Revival ==
Actor Kunchacko Boban announced that Udaya Pictures is producing the 2016 film Kochauvva Paulo Ayyappa Coelho directed by Sidhartha Siva, thus reviving the prestigious Malayalam production house after 30 years.


== See also ==
Navodaya Studio


== References ==


== External links ==
Udaya Studios at Wikimapia