Udaya TV

Udaya TV is a regional Kannada language Indian cable television station. It is also the first Kannada satellite channel in India.
The channel is part of the Chennai-based Sun Network headquartered at Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
Udaya TV is telecast in several nations, including India, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Malaysia, Canada and the United States. Udaya TV will complete its silver jubilee in TV industry on 1 June 2019.
Some of the other Kannada channels from Sun Network group are Udaya Movies (a 24-hour Kannada movies channel), Udaya News (a 24-hour Kannada news channel - Discontinued), Udaya Music (a 24-hour Kannada music channel) and Udaya Comedy (a 24-hour comedy channel). On 16 March 2017, Udaya TV became the Second channel in Kannada Television to be broadcast in 1080i Full HD . The High Definition Channel is Udaya HD and was first telecast via Sun Direct DTH service on Channel number 860.


== History ==
Udaya TV was incorporated on 2 May 1994 as a private limited company engaged in television broadcasting with a registered office at Chennai, Tamil Nadu. It was launched by the chairman of Sun TV, Kalanidhi Maran, and it started broadcasting from 1 June 1994. It was the first Kannada satellite channel to go on air.It grew rapidly and by May 2000, Udaya TV has captured 70% of ad spending on TV in the state of Karnataka.It won the Indian Television Academy's best Kannada TV channel award in the year 2001 and 2002.
It forayed into FM radio broadcasting by launching Vishaka FM, an FM channel in Visakhapatnam.It was a free-on-air channel until 1 August 2004, when it was made a pay channel with a subscription fee of Rs.18.In February 2006, the directors of Udaya TV were Kalanidhi Maran, S. Selvam and Kaveri Kalanidhi. S. Selvam was also the Director of the Bangalore Bureau of Udaya TV.In November 2006, Udaya TV Ltd. was merged with Sun TV Ltd. along with Gemini TV Ltd.


== Notable anchors ==
Golden star Ganesh started his career and got popular at Comedy Time. Later, Anupama Bhat and Srikantha continued show on Udaya TV
Tejashwini Sreeramesh, Lok Sabha MP from the Kanakapura constituency of Karnataka; previously an anchor of a talk show, Mukha Mukhi telecast on Udaya TV
Srinath, an actor in Kannada cinema; a Vice President of Udaya TV; hosted a show for married couples called Aadarsha Dampatigalu (Ideal-Couples) on Udaya TV


== Programs and Shows ==
Adarsha Dampatigalu (Kannada: ಆದರ್ಶ ದಂಪತಿಗಳು) - "best couple competition"; Sunday mornings
Aksharamaale - weekly singing competition, including the popular game of antyakshari; the competition is held in all the major towns and cities of Karnataka
Crazy Time -  a game show played on streets in different places in Karnataka
Crime Story - by Balakrishna Kakatkar, covering the various crimes in Karnataka
Harate - special program on the morning of every festival, such as Ugadi, Sankranthi, and Vijaya Dashami
Kurigalu Saar Kurigalu - daily night program on making fools
Udaya News - daily news, telecast on mornings and evenings
Hrudayadinda- Morning show
Deal or NO Deal
Sakath Cinema
Savalige Sai- Night Show every Saturday and Sunday
Thuttha Muttha - Night show every Saturday and Sunday
Kairuchi - Afternoon Show Monday - Saturday
Khara Masala - Morning show every Saturday and Sunday
Bill Nimdu Dhudu Namdu - Afternoon Show Monday - Saturday


== Current Telecasting Serials ==


== Serials telecasted ==


== Awards ==
Indian Television Academy's award for the best Kannada TV channel for 2001
Indian Television Academy's award for the best Kannada TV channel for 2002


== See also ==
List of Kannada-language television channels
Television in India
Media in Karnataka
Media of India


== References ==


== External links ==
Udaya TV Official website
Udaya TV in Canada (in English)