Kampung Pandan

Kampung Pandan is a village located in the Titiwangsa constituency in eastern Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, surrounded by Ampang, Maluri, Pudu and Bukit Bintang. Once a small
village, Kampung Pandan has now grown and developed tremendously.
It used to be an area of well planned settlement (rumah tanah lot/with title deed) to accommodate the people who were moved from their residences for development purposes (among the areas were Maxwell Village)in the late 60s.
The area developed and was occupied with two sections of the village namely Kampong Pandan Dalam (settlement) and Kampong Pandan Luar (where the town was).Along with the development of Kuala Lumpur,the area prospered. 
The village however seen squatters builts, resided by the people from other states (Malaysian)who were looking for job opportunities in the city back in the early 70s.
Another stream of squatters were built in the early 90s as there were demand from illegal immigrants (mostly Indonesian)who worked in various industries especially the emerging commercial development (construction). In early 2000s the squatters were demolished.
The current residences in Kampung Pandan are part of the original settlement and the houses are changing (renovated/rebuilt)rapidly in terms of its designs while some retained its original design adding a quaint charm to the area. 
The village has an elementary school built named Sekolah Rendah Kampong Pandan which was renamed as Sekolah Rendah Kebangsaan Tun Hussein Onn.
Among famous landmark in Kampung Pandan is the Mokhtar Dahari Community Square or Dataran Komuniti Mokhtar Dahari, a community square named after the famous Malaysian footballer as he used to live in Kampung Pandan and played football here.


== Public transportation ==
rapidKL bus T407 connects some areas in Kampung Pandan to  SBK20  Tun Razak Exchange MRT station.


== Educational institutions ==
SRK Tun Hussein Onn (formerly known as SK Kampong Pandan)

SMART College
Security Plus Academy
SMK St. Gabriel
Tsun Jin Primary School
SMK Aminuddin Baki
Institut Kemahiran Mara (IKM) Kuala Lumpur
SMK Datok Lokman
Taylor's International School Kuala Lumpur (formerly known as Sekolah Sri Garden)
SMK Taman Maluri


== See also ==
Kampung Padang Balang