Smt.Ramkuwar Devi Fomra Vivekananda Vidyalaya

Smt. Ramkuwar Devi Fomra Vivekananda Vidyalaya Junior College (SRDFVV) is a co-educational senior secondary school in the  suburb of Chromepet, Chennai, India.
One of the best schools in Chennai ,40 years of excellence in Education the school has produced Leaders in technology ,medicine and other fields .
It is an English medium school, affiliated to CBSE, New Delhi and a unit of the Vivekananda Educational Society, a non-profit, service organisation, which is part of the Vidya Bharati Akhil Bharatiya Shiksha Samsthan. The society runs 21 schools with about 450 teachers and about 15,000 students.
The Principal is Mrs Indra shankar. 
In 2003 the school began to follow the Tamil Nadu State Board syllabus at the senior secondary level. In 2014 once again the school began to follow CBSE syllabus at senior secondary level.
The school has four blocks namely Pragnya Vikas, Shishuvatika, Primary block and the Main block. The school also has an administrative block.


== Events ==
The school runs the 'Three-day Culturals', in the last week of January or the first week of February. The theme is usually from Hindu Mythology. Songs related to the theme are then chosen or composed and sung and recorded by the students themselves, under the guidance of the music teachers. Anecdotes are represented in the form of skits, for which the voices are pre-recorded. Following this, some students are trained to dance for the recorded songs in Indian classical and folk forms, while others are trained to play roles in the skits in which they are required to lip-sync with the recorded dialogues. This three-day show is popular among the people of Chromepet and attracts huge crowds.
Other events besides the Culturals include the Sports Day celebration in January and the Annual day Celebration in February or March. Other functions celebrated are Gokulashtami, Guru Poornima, Mahakavi Bharatiyar day, Swami Vivekananda Jayanti, Teacher's Day, and Rakshabandhan.
Cultural education is prioritized in equal terms with formal education in this school.
The school also conducts competitions every year on the eve of swami Vivekananda's birthday. Many schools participate in this inter-school competition. The prizes are distributed to the winners on the birthday of Swami Vivekananda in a very grand manner. 
The school also conducts other programs on science, arts, environment, etc.


== External links ==
School Website
rediff.com
ndtv.com