Vivekananda Degree College, Puttur

Vivekananda Degree College (also known as "Vivekananda College of Arts, Science & Commerce" or "VC Puttur") is located in the locality of Nehru Nagar, about 3 km north-east to the center of the city of Puttur in Karnataka state, India.  This college is run by Vivekananda Vidyavardhaka Sangha Puttur (VVS).The college is accredited at 'A' by National Assessment and Accreditation Council.The college totally has around 2000 students and 100 faculty members in various disciplines.


== History ==

Established in 1965 by a private organization "Puttur Education Society", this college has long been providing Bachelor's Degree education to students from Dakshina Kannada District, Madikeri and Kasargod among others. The college is named after the great saint Swami Vivekananda in recognition of his exceptional work in spreading the wisdom not only across India, but also across the world. Swami Vivekananda was one of the most famous and influential spiritual leaders of the philosophies of Vedanta and Yoga.
The visionaries and members of 'Puttur Education Society' behind the origin of this college are Molahalli Shiva Rao, Baindoor Rama Rao, Dharmastala Manjayya Heggade, Rao Bahadur Raghunatha Rao, Baindoor Prabhakar Rao, Jnanapeeta award winner Dr Kota Shivarama Karanth, and Sri K Rama Bhat. The members of 'Puttur Education Society' (now renamed as 'Vivekananda Vidyavardhaka Sangha') and other individual philanthropists are responsible for the continuous growth of this college.


== Academics ==
The duration of the courses for bachelor's degree is three years. All courses include two mandatory languages: English and either Kannada, Hindi or Sanskrit. Courses award Bachelor of Arts (B.A), Bachelor of Science (B.Sc), Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com), Bachelor of Business Management (B.B.M.) or Bachelor of Computer Application (B.C.A.). In addition there are one year certificate course and two year diploma course in Rural Marketing.


== Admissions ==
The admissions, based on the availability of seats, are open to everyone who has completed Pre University Course (or any other 11th and 12th grade course that is considered equivalent by the Mangalore University). Those seeking admission to B.Sc. should have studied Science in PUC. Those seeking admission to B.Com. and B.B.M. should have studied Business Studies and Accountancy in PUC. Those seeking admission to B.A and B.C.A. could come from any stream.


== Campus ==
Vivekananda College campus is spread over an area of about 45 acres (180,000 m2) located in Nehru Nagar, approximately 3 km from the city of Puttur. A statue of Sri. Swami Vivekananda is situated next to the road leading to the entrance of the college campus. 

Academic BuildingThe picture below shows the Vivekananda College academic building. It is a two-storey building forming a quadrangle. Currently, under the new leadership, the building is in the process of renovation and expansion.

LibraryCollege library is located very close to the academic building. The library follows an open-access system and allows outsiders too to use books of referral worth.

Digital CenterThe digital center is located inside the library and houses computers for internet browsing and reference.

HostelsThe hostels for boys and girls are available at a very subsidized rate for students from remote places and are situated within the campus. They also have individual attached vegetarian messes to cater to meals for hostelers.

CanteenThe college canteen is located inside the campus and is open during college hours. It serves vegetarian food.

Play GroundThe college has a large playground for sports, games and other athletics needs.

Free Lunch SchemeTo support students from weaker sections of the society, the college and its Parent-Teacher Association (P.T.A.) provide free lunch to deserving students.

Vivekananda College Employees Co-operative SocietyThe campus also houses a Co-operative Society providing supplies at a reasonable price and a bank to support savings accounts for students.

Banking and ATM facilityThe college has a branch of Canara Bank with ATM facility in the campus. 

Health CenterA P.T.A.-sponsored Health Center is available for emergency medical requirements and regular medical check-ups. The health center doctors render free medical services.

AuditoriumThe college campus also has a spacious auditorium that hosts numerous events.


== See also ==
Vivekanda Degree College, Kukatpally
Mangalore University


== References ==


== External links ==
vc.vivekanandaedu.org, Official Website
Vivekananda Vidyavardhaka Sangha Website