Cardassians (DS9 episode)

"Cardassians" is the 25th episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek: Deep Space Nine. It is the fifth episode of the second season.
Garak investigates the identity of a Cardassian boy abandoned on Bajor.


== Plot ==
When Garak sees a Cardassian boy on Deep Space Nine, he decides to introduce himself, but the boy, Rugal, bites him on the hand. The boy has been raised by Bajoran parents and taught to hate and fear Cardassians. His adoptive parents claim that they do not consider him a Cardassian any more, but allegations of abuse lead to an investigation into the family. Gul Dukat tells Sisko that he is trying to bring orphaned Cardassians back from Bajor and that the discovery of Rugal will strengthen his case. Miles and Keiko O'Brien agree to care for Rugal during the investigation, and Rugal helps Miles overcome his prejudice against Cardassians.
Garak suspects that more is happening than meets the eye, and persuades Bashir to requests permission for the two to travel to Bajor. Sisko grants the request after Dukat informs him that Rugal is the son of a prominent Cardassian politician, Kotan Pa'Dar. Garak and Bashir travel to an orphanage that took in Cardassian orphans when the occupation of Bajor ended and investigate the orphanage's records. Garak suggests that the situation is tied to a conflict between military and civilian interests on Cardassia; Pa'Dar is a political rival of Dukat, having cost Dukat his position as prefect by ordering the Cardassian withdrawal from Bajor.
Back on the station, Pa'Dar arrives to greet Rugal, but the boy does not remember him and calls Pa'Dar a "Cardassian butcher." 
Regardless, Pa'Dar wants his son back, but Rugal's adoptive father refuses to relinquish him. They ask Sisko to be a neutral arbiter. Dukat attends the ensuing hearing. Meanwhile, Garak and Bashir's track down the woman who took Rugal in at the orphanage, who remembers that a Cardassian woman attached to Terok Nor (the Cardassian name for DS9) brought him to her.
Bashir interrupts the hearing, alleging that Rugal's discovery was planned by Dukat all along: Dukat ordered one of his subordinates to leave Rugal behind, knowing that the boy would one day be found and that Pa'Dar would be humiliated as a result.  Dukat storms out, and Sisko awards custody of the boy to Pa'Dar, who reassures Sisko that Dukat will never reveal what happened now that he too has been humiliated. Later, Bashir and Garak sit down for lunch, and Bashir asks Garak for the truth about his history with Dukat. Garak smiles and tells him to notice the details, which he compares to crumbs scattered across the table.


== The Next Generation similarities ==
"Cardassians" has similarities to the fourth season TNG episode, "Suddenly Human". In both "Cardassians" and "Suddenly Human", a young male alien is living with a family of another species, who adopt him after the conclusion of a battle or war. In both episodes, the adopting family insists on the return of the child, while the biological family also fights for custody. Tensions rise as the question of custody is decided. In both episodes, custody is decided by the commanding officers present.
However, the episodes have different conclusions. In "Cardassians", Commander Benjamin Sisko removes the child from his caring Bajoran foster family when it is revealed that he was placed in foster care under false pretenses by another Cardassian. In "Suddenly Human", Captain Picard returns the young man Jono/Jeremiah Rossa (played by actor Chad Allen) to his adopting father because the young man is old enough to decide for himself with whom he wishes to live, and because it is the only life he has ever known.


== References ==
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine DVD set, volume 2, disc 2, selection 1.
P. Farrand, Nitpicker's Guide for Deep Space Nine Trekkers New York: Dell (1996): 106 - 109


== External links ==
"Cardassians" on IMDb
"Cardassians" at TV.com
"Cardassians" at Memory Alpha (a Star Trek wiki)
"Cardassians" at StarTrek.com