Bad Apple (Touhou Project)

The Touhou Project (Japanese: 東方Project, Hepburn: Tōhō Purojekuto, lit. "Eastern Project"), often referred to simply as Touhou, is a series of Japanese bullet hell shoot 'em up video games created by dōjin soft developer Team Shanghai Alice. The sole member of Team Shanghai Alice, known as ZUN, has independently produced music, graphics, and programming for 22 games in the series, additionally collaborating  with Twilight Frontier in the production of six official fighting games. ZUN has also collaborated with various dōjin circles in the production of related print works and music albums.The setting of the Touhou Project is Gensokyo, a fictional realm sealed from the outside world and inhabited by humans and yōkai, supernatural beings based in Japanese folklore. The protagonist of the series is the maiden of Hakurei Shrine, Reimu Hakurei, who manages the barrier and resolves various incidents in Gensokyo by battling antagonistic yōkai. The first five games were developed for the Japanese NEC PC-9800 series of computers; bullet hell mechanics were introduced in the second game, Story of Eastern Wonderland. Embodiment of Scarlet Devil, released in August 2002, marked a shift to the Microsoft Windows platform, bringing the games to a larger audience. It was followed by several sequels, including several spin-off games diverging from the series' traditional vertically-scrolling danmaku (弾幕, lit. "bullet curtain") gameplay.
The Touhou Project is notable for its high number of derivative works, a phenomenon that has been attributed to the few restrictions placed by ZUN on the use of his characters and settings. The series has become an ubiquitous feature of Japanese user-generated content, spawning a vast body of fan-made artwork, print works, video games, and music, as well as several anime adaptations and Internet memes. Unofficial works are frequently sold at fan conventions, including Comiket, where the franchise has often held the top spot for circle participation, and the annual official Touhou Project convention Reitaisai, where trial versions of the games are typically distributed prior to release. The series was inducted into the Guinness World Records in October 2010 as the "most prolific fan-made shooter series".


== Games ==


=== PC-98 games ===
The first five titles in the Touhou series were developed for the Japanese NEC PC-9800 series of personal computers, making use of the platform's FM synthesis audio and 16-bit color graphics. They were developed by ZUN (under the name "ZUN Soft") while studying at Tokyo Denki University and published by Amusement Makers, a video game development club at the university that he was a member of. The PC-98 titles have come to be known among Japanese fans as kyūsaku (旧作, lit. "old works"). 

Highly Responsive to Prayers (東方靈異伝, Tōhō Reiiden, lit. "Wondrous Tale")
The 1st game in the series, released on August 15, 1997 at Comiket 52. It was first showcased in November 1996 at the 20th Hatoyama Matsuri, the annual fair at Tokyo Denki University's Hatoyama campus, where ZUN was a student. It includes the first appearance of series protagonist Reimu Hakurei, the miko of Hakurei Shrine (博麗神社 Hakurei Jinja). After her shrine is destroyed, she charges through a gateway opened to another world, intent on locating and punishing those responsible. It features gameplay similar to Arkanoid, differing from the vertically-scrolling format of later titles. Players direct a Yin-Yang Orb (陰陽玉 Onmyō-gyoku) by side-kicking it, swinging Reimu's purification rod (御幣 gohei), and firing amulets (御札 ofuda), with the goal of overturning all the cards in a level. If the player runs out of time, bullets rain down from the top of the screen until the player completes the level or dies. There are 20 stages, with every fifth stage being a boss bottle in which the player uses the orb to deal damage. After completing Stage 5, the player is given a choice between two routes, Makai (魔界, lit. "demon world") and Hell (地獄 jigoku), which each feature distinct stages, bosses, and endings. It features four levels of difficulty that would later become constants in the series: Easy, Normal, Hard, and Lunatic.Story of Eastern Wonderland (東方封魔録, Tōhō Fūmaroku, lit. "Demon-Sealing Record")
The 2nd game in the series, released on August 15, 1997 at Comiket 52, alongside Highly Responsive to Prayers. Reimu Hakurei returns from a training session in the mountains only to find the Hakurei Shrine overrun by ghosts and yōkai. Excited at the opportunity to test her fledgling abilities, she takes off on the back of her turtle Genjii with her Yin-Yang Orbs to seek out the source of the invasion. It is the first vertically-scrolling danmaku (弾幕 "barrage", lit. "bullet curtain") game in the series, and also marks the first appearance of Marisa Kirisame, the second major player character in the series, appearing here as the Stage 4 Boss. ZUN has cited shoot 'em up arcade game Darius Gaiden as a major influence for the gameplay, which consists of firing bullets at bosses that appear from the top of the screen, while also dodging their own bullet attacks. The game features 5 stages and introduces many features that would later become series hallmarks, including selectable attack types, smaller hitboxes, a power-up system, point items, midbosses, and an unlockable Extra Stage. According to ZUN, only 30 copies of Highly Responsive to Prayers and 50 copies of Story of Eastern Wonderland were sold at Comiket 52.Phantasmagoria of Dim. Dream (東方夢時空, Tōhō Yumejikū, lit. "Space-Time Dream")
The 3rd game in the series, released on December 29, 1997 at Comiket 53. On a morning walk, Reimu Hakurei stumbles across mysterious ruins that have suddenly appeared a short distance from Hakurei Shrine's gateway. She joins in a violent competition with others who want to explore them, as it is said that the one who reaches the heart of the ruins first will win a prize. In Match Play Mode, it is a versus-type scrolling shooter similar to Twinkle Star Sprites, in which two players engage in danmaku battles in split-screen. In Story Mode, the player faces off against nine AI opponents, with each more capable than the last. The combat system makes use a "Spell Gauge", with characters unleashing attacks of varying strength based on their charged level of magical power. According to ZUN, approximately 100 copies of the game were sold.Lotus Land Story (東方幻想郷, Tōhō Gensōkyō, lit. "Fantasy Land")
The 4th game in the series, released on August 14, 1998 at Comiket 54. The peace in Gensokyo (the name for the world of series, first used in the game's title) is broken when a tremendous power surges from beneath a lake high in the mountains, causing yōkai to swarm the Hakurei Shrine. Reimu Hakurei and Marisa Kirisame travel to seek out and eliminate the source of the disturbance, battling yōkai along the way. It features 6 stages, with the game ending prematurely in Stage 5 when playing on Easy difficulty or after using a "continue".  New features include a "graze" counter for near-misses and more complex scoring system. According to ZUN, 200 to 300 copies of the game were sold.Mystic Square (東方怪綺談, Tōhō Kaikidan, lit. "Bizarre Romantic Story")
The 5th and final Touhou game for the PC-98, released on December 30, 1998 at Comiket 55. For no apparent reason, massive quantities of demons begin pouring from a cave high in the mountains of Gensokyo. Seeking out the source of this invasion, Reimu Hakurei and others must battle through six stages and travel deep into Makai to confront the one behind the incident. Mima and Yuuka, the final bosses of Story of Eastern Wonderland and Lotus Land Story respectively, return as playable characters along with Marisa Kirisame. The game makes use of a "Dream Gauge" system, which rewards the player for collecting items by clearing enemy bullets when it is filled to maximum.


=== Windows games ===
After the release of Mystic Square, ZUN graduated and the Touhou Project became inactive for four years, a period during which he wrote soundtracks for the Seihou Project (西方Project, lit. "Western Project"), a series of three danmaku games developed by his peers in Amusement Makers as a counterpart to Touhou. He left the group in 2001 to focus on development of Touhou Project games for Microsoft Windows, forming the one-man dōjin circle Team Shanghai Alice and self-publishing all subsequent titles. According to ZUN, the Windows games represent a "clean slate" for the series canon, albeit with many references to the PC-98 titles. Spin-off games from the main series vary in genre and are numbered with decimals.

Embodiment of Scarlet Devil (東方紅魔郷, Tōhō Kōmakyō, lit. ""Scarlet Devil Land")
The 6th game in the series and the first on Windows, released on August 11, 2002 at Comiket 62. It marked a dramatic graphical improvement from the PC-98 games, as well as a switch from music generated with FM synthesis to synthesized PCM and MIDI. A peaceful summer in Gensokyo is interrupted when a scarlet mist descends and blocks out the sun. As either the shrine maiden Reimu Hakurei or the witch Marisa Kirisame, the player confronts the source of the mist, the Scarlet Devil Mansion (紅魔館 Koumakan) and the mysterious Scarlet Devil that lives within. It introduces the "Spell Card" system, in which bosses fire danmaku patterns in a specific sequence as their health is depleted, with a health bar and unique name for each attack.
Several features from the PC-98 era were re-introduced in Embodiment of the Scarlet Devil, which set a standard for the later Windows titles. At the start of a game, the player must choose an attack style, which affects their character's weapon type and Spell Card. A limited number of "bombs" are provided as a method of escaping from difficult situations by dealing heavy damage to enemies, cancelling all bullets, and collecting all items on the screen. The game features six increasingly difficult stages, with the boss of each stage being preceded by a less powerful midboss. Playing on Easy difficulty causes the game to prematurely end after Stage 5, and completing the game after using a "continue" results in a bad ending. Once a good ending has been achieved on Normal or higher difficulty, the player unlocks a bonus "Extra Stage", which features extremely difficult midboss and boss battles.Perfect Cherry Blossom (東方妖々夢, Tōhō Yōyōmu, lit. "Ghostly Dream")
The 7th game in the series, released on August 17, 2003 at Comiket 64. As the month turns to May, it is clear that winter in Gensokyo has lasted far longer than normal, and its denizens begin to suspect foul play. As Reimu, Marisa, or Sakuya Izayoi from Embodiment of Scarlet Devil, the player must embark on a trip to Netherworld (冥界 Meikai, lit. "Dark World") to find the ones responsible for stopping spring's coming. With the addition of Sakuya, Perfect Cherry Blossom continues the series tradition of former bosses reappearing as playable characters. A notable feature added in this title is Focused Fire mode, which allows the player to slow their movement and focus their shots when activated.Immaterial and Missing Power (東方萃夢想, Tōhō Suimusō, lit. "Gathering Reverie")
The 7.5th game in the series and the first versus fighting game, released on December 30, 2004 at Comiket 67. It strays from the bullet hell format, being instead a 2D fighting game with an bias towards projectile attacks. It was primarily developed by Twilight Frontier, with ZUN providing the scenarios, Spell Card designs, and several music tracks. Taking place after the events of Perfect Cherry Blossom but before those of Imperishable Night, a strange mist descends on Gensokyo as Reimu Hakurei and other residents find themselves inexplicably holding a feast every three days. Initially playable characters include Reimu, Marisa, and Sakuya, as well as Alice Margatroid and Youmu Konpaku from Perfect Cherry Blossom and Patchouli Knowledge from Embodiment of Scarlet Devil. Additional playable characters become unlocked as the player completes the initial scenarios. A local multiplayer mode is available in addition to the singleplayer Story Mode, with an unofficial patch enabling netplay.Imperishable Night (東方永夜抄, Tōhō Eiyashō, lit. "Eternal Night Vignette")
The 8th game in the series, released on August 15, 2004 at Comiket 66. It is the eve of Gensokyo's yearly Harvest Moon Festival (月見 Tsukimi) when it is discovered that the moon has been replaced with a fake that will not grow full. Combined teams of humans and yōkai set out into the Bamboo Forest of the Lost (迷いの竹林 Mayoi no Chikurin) to confront the culprits and restore the moon before the night is over. The four playable teams are the Illusionary Barrier Team (Reimu Hakurei and Yukari Yakumo), the Aria of Forbidden Magic Team (Marisa Kirisame and Alice Margatroid), the Visionary Scarlet Devil Team (Sakuya Izayoi and Remilia Scarlet), and the Netherworld Dwellers' Team (Youmu Konpaku and Yuyuko Saigyouji, the bosses of Perfect Cherry Blossom). The player can swap primary fire between teammates by entering Focused Fire mode.Phantasmagoria of Flower View (東方花映塚, Tōhō Kaeizuka, lit. "Flower Reflecting Mound")
The 9th game in the series, released on August 15, 2005 at Comiket 68. The game is a split-screen versus-type shooter similar to Phantasmagoria of Dim. Dream, a first for the Windows titles. Spring has arrived and Gensokyo's flowers are blooming out of control, with even out-of-season varieties blooming in unnatural quantities. The player must battle their way through 9 stages to reach Muenzuka (無縁塚, lit. "(Burial) Mound of the Nameless") and reveal the truth behind the abnormal spring. Initially playable characters include Reimu, Marisa, Sakuya, Youmu, and Reisen Udongein Inaba from Imperishable Night, with a total of 16 playable characters after all unlocks are completed. An official patch enabling multiplayer netplay has been released.Shoot the Bullet (東方文花帖, Tōhō Bunkachō, lit. "Word Flower Album")
The 9.5th game in the series, released on December 30, 2005 at Comiket 69. The game was originally created as a minigame to be included with the official fanbook Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red, but was later developed into a full title. Playing as tengu reporter Aya Shameimaru, the player is tasked with photographing bosses and their danmaku for her newspaper in ten increasingly difficult stages. The game is unique in that the player has no standard shot or bombs; rather, the camera is the main method of offense and defense, as it clears bullets from the screen when used. Scoring is based on the contents of each photo, including the amount and type of bullets included. The game features bosses from Embodiment of Scarlet Devil to Phantasmagoria of Flower View.Mountain of Faith (東方風神録, Tōhō Fūjinroku, lit. "Wind God Chronicles")
The 10th game in the series, released on August 17, 2007 at Comiket 72. This entry marks a "soft reboot" for the series, with an total overhaul of the game engine resulting in substantial design and pacing changes. One autumn, Reimu receives a message demanding the closure of Hakurei Shrine and threatening its destruction at the hands of the god of Yōkai Mountain. As either Reimu or Marisa, the player must ascend the mountain in order to confront the god behind the threat and prevent the shrine from being taken over. The bomb counter has been removed and replaced by the "Options" system, which adds up to four "satellites" that hover near the player and fire bullets. They can be obtained by collecting power items and have additional effects based on selected weapon type.Scarlet Weather Rhapsody (東方緋想天, Tōhō Hisōten, lit. "Scarlet Perception Heaven")
The 10.5th game in the series and the second versus fighting game, released on May 25, 2008 at Reitaisai 5. It is a sequel to the first fighting game in the series, Immaterial and Missing Power. The story revolves around strange weather phenomenon occurring around Gensokyo and follows Reimu and the other protagonists in their search for the culprit. It features a 20-Spell Card deck system, flight-based movement mechanics, and changing weather conditions that affect the gameplay during matches. Both local and online multiplayer modes are available in addition to the singleplayer Story Mode.Subterranean Animism (東方地霊殿, Tōhō Chireiden, lit. "Earth-Spirit Palace")
The 11th game in the series, released on August 16, 2008 at Comiket 74. A mysterious geyser appears one day near the Hakurei Shrine, which also seems to spout evil spirits from underground. Playing as Reimu or Marisa, the player must travel to the Underworld to stop the source of the geyser, assisted by one of three yōkai allies communicating from above-ground (Yukari Yakumo, Suika Ibuki, or Aya Shameimaru for Reimu; Alice Margatroid, Patchouli Knowledge, or Nitori Kawashiro for Marisa). The game features a scoring system based on grazing as well as the "Options" system introduced in Mountain of Faith.Undefined Fantastic Object (東方星蓮船, Tōhō Seirensen, lit. "Star-Lotus Ship")
The 12th game in the series, released on August 15, 2009 at Comiket 76. Spring has come to Gensokyo and a magical flying ship that is said to bring good omen has appeared in the sky. The player assumes the role of either Reimu, Marisa, or Sanae Kochiya, who returns from Mountain of Faith, as the three girls race to board the vessel. The bonus system is based on collecting "Undefined Fantastic Objects", or UFOs, which appear from defeated enemies as unidentified flying objects in three colors (green, red, and blue).Touhou Hisoutensoku (東方非想天則 〜 超弩級ギニョルの謎を追え, Tōhō Hisōtensoku ~ Chōdokyū Ginyoru no Nazo wo Oe, lit. "Unperceiving of Natural Law ~ Chase the Enigma of the Gargantuan Guignol")
The 12.3rd game in the series and the third versus fighting game, released on August 15, 2009 at Comiket 76. It retains many features from Scarlet Weather Rhapsody while adding new playable characters, Spell Cards, and weather conditions. The Story mode, initially playable with Sanae Kochiya, Cirno, and Hong Meiling, revolves around chasing the silhouette of a giant creature that has piqued the interest of Gensokyo's residents. The three girls, each with their own theory as to its nature, set out to investigate the mystery of the giant. A new gameplay addition is an associated Spell Card for each of the nine playable characters, usable by any character once they are unlocked. Both local and online multiplayer modes are available in addition to the singleplayer Story Mode.Double Spoiler (ダブルスポイラー 〜 東方文花帖, Daburu Supoiraa ~ Tōhō Bunkachō, lit. "Word Flower Album")
The 12.5th game in the series, released on March 14, 2010 at Reitaisai 7. It is a sequel to Shoot the Bullet, following Aya Shameimaru on her mission to photograph various bosses and their danmaku. It retains much of the same gameplay from its predecessor and features bosses from Mountain of Faith to Undefined Fantastic Object. Aya's colleague and fellow tengu reporter Hatate Himekaidou serves as an unlockable character. The game was released on Steam on August 2, 2019.Fairy Wars (妖精大戦争 〜 東方三月精, Yōsei Daisensō ~ Tōhō Sangetsusei, lit. "Great Fairy Wars ~ Three Fairies")
The 12.8th game in the series, released on August 14, 2010 at Comiket 78. It is based on the official Touhou Sangetsusei manga series. After the Three Fairies of Light destroy ice fairy Cirno's house one winter, she plans to take her revenge the trio in the spring. The game features three stages and one playable character, Cirno, who has the unique ability to freeze bullets mid-air. It was released on Steam on August 2, 2019.Ten Desires (東方神霊廟, Tōhō Shinreibyō, lit. "Divine Spirit Mausoleum")
The 13th game in the series, released on August 13, 2011 at Comiket 80. Like Mountain of Faith, the game is somewhat of a "soft reboot" of the series' gameplay mechanics. After the events of Undefined Fantastic Object, Reimu and Marisa notice an increase in spirits in Gensokyo and take off to investigate. Also playable are Sanae, who seeks to utilize the power of the divine spirits for the Moriya Shrine gods, and Youmu, who wants to exterminate what she views as unnecessary ghosts. The most notable gameplay addition are "Divine Spirits", which are dropped by defeated enemies and come in four varieties (blue, gray, purple, and green). Collecting spirits fills the player's "Trance Gauge", used to enter an invincible "Trance" once filled. It was released on Steam on June 19, 2019.Hopeless Masquerade (東方心綺楼, Tōhō Shinkirō, lit. "Heart Elegant Tower")
The 13.5th game in the series and the fourth versus fighting game, released on May 26, 2013 at Reitaisai 10. The Human Village has fallen into despair in the wake of the high number of supernatural incidents, prompting adherents of Gensokyo's three competing religions (Shinto, Taoism, and Buddhism) to compete with each other in expanding their faith's influence. This concept is reflected in the "Popularity" system, in which damage dealt and received is measured on a meter that unlocks a special "Last Word" combo when it is fully filled. The game features a completely reworked engine, changing the core gameplay heavily compared to the previous three fighting games. Both local and online multiplayer modes are available in addition to the singleplayer Story Mode.Double Dealing Character (東方輝針城, Tōhō Kishinjō, lit. "Shining Needle Castle")
The 14th game in the series, released on August 12, 2013 at Comiket 84. Reimu, Marisa, and Sakuya are the playable characters, with the gameplay largely resembling that of Ten Desires. The main weapons of the three protagonists start to behave bizarrely, just as clouds begin to gather and yōkai rebel all over Gensokyo. On August 10, 2014, the game was confirmed for release on Playism, making Double Dealing Character the first Touhou Project game to be released for digital download.  On May 7, 2015, Playism made the game available for download in Western territories, marking the Touhou Project's official Western debut. It was released on Steam on June 19, 2019.Impossible Spell Card (弾幕アマノジャク, Danmaku Amanojaku, lit. "Bullet Curtain Amanojaku")
The 14.3rd game in the series, released on May 11, 2014 at Reitaisai 11. The player controls the final boss of Double Dealing Character, amanojaku Seija Kijin, as she attempts to use nine "cheat" items to clear nearly impossible-to-beat Spell Cards. A bounty is set on Seija, and several characters from previous titles attempt to capture her over a period of ten days. The game was released on Steam on April 1, 2019.Urban Legend in Limbo (東方深秘録, Tōhō Shinpiroku, lit. "Deep Secret Record")
The 14.5th game in the series and the fifth versus fighting game, released on May 10, 2015 at Reitaisai 12. It features a similar style and gameplay to the series' previous fighting game, Hopeless Masquerade, adding a new "Occult Ball" system controlling special moves and battle effects. The story centers around the strange rumors that have been circulating in Gensokyo's Human Village, which have begun to manifest themselves in the form of supernatural anomalies. It was released for PlayStation 4 on December 8, 2016 with several additional features, including Reisen Udongein Inaba as a playable character, becoming the first Touhou Project game released for a console system. Both local and online multiplayer modes are available in addition to the singleplayer Story Mode.Legacy of Lunatic Kingdom (東方紺珠伝, Tōhō Kanjuden, lit. "Ultramarine Orb Tale")
The 15th game in the series, released on August 14, 2015 at Comiket 88. The game features four playable characters: Reimu, Marisa, Sanae, and Reisen. Someone has taken over the Lunar Capital, prompting the Lunarians to attempt to "purify" Gensokyo in order to make it suitable for them to live in; the girls must work quickly to stop the invasion and find the perpetrator responsible. Unlike previous games in the series, Legacy of Lunatic Kingdom has two game modes: Legacy Mode, which is similar to the previous games, and Pointdevice Mode, which replaces lives and continues with a series of checkpoints. When the player gets hit in this mode, they restart from the beginning of the current chapter with a small penalty to power. The game was released on Steam on April 1, 2019.Antinomy of Common Flowers (東方憑依華, Tōhō Hyōibana, lit. "Spirit Possession Bloom")
The 15.5th game in the series and the sixth versus fighting game, released on December 29, 2017 at Comiket 93. It is a sequel to Urban Legend in Limbo, again featuring special moves controlled by the "Occult Ball" system. An urban legend incident known as "Perfect Possession" has developed, combining pairs of Gensokyo residents in a single body and enabling them to battle as a switchable "Master" and "Slave" tag team. The game was released on Steam on January 5, 2018. Both local and online multiplayer modes are available in addition to the singleplayer Story Mode.Hidden Star in Four Seasons (東方天空璋, Tōhō Tenkūshō, lit. "Heavenly Jade Dipper")
The 16th game in the series, released on August 11, 2017 at Comiket 92. The seasons in Gensokyo have gone haywire, with spring meadows alongside summer skies, autumn trees, and winter blizzards. Reimu, Marisa, Aya, and Cirno head out to find the cause of this chaos. The game adds a "Sub-Season" mechanic, in which the player can collect seasonal items (cherry petals, green leaves, red leaves, and snowflakes) in order to gain various boosts. Collected sub-seasons can also be released as a mini-bomb in order to clear enemy projectiles. The game was released on Steam on November 16, 2017, marking the Touhou Project's Steam debut.Violet Detector (秘封ナイトメアダイアリー, Hifū Naitomea Daiarī, lit. "Secret Sealing Nightmare Diary")
The 16.5th game in the series, released on August 10, 2018 at Comiket 94. A danmaku photography game in the style of Shoot the Bullet and Double Spoiler featuring the antagonist of Urban Legend in Limbo, Sumireko Usami, as the playable character. It features bosses from Legacy of Lunatic Kingdom to Hidden Star in Four Seasons, as well as Reimu, Marisa, and most of the final and extra stage bosses from the previous Windows games. The game was released on Steam on September 5, 2018.Wily Beast and Weakest Creature (東方鬼形獣, Tōhō Kikeijū, lit. "Oni-Shaped Beast")
The 17th game in the series, released on August 12, 2019 at Comiket 96. When Reimu, Marisa and Youmu find out that malicious animal spirits are planning to attack the surface world, they venture into Hell to stop them, accompanied by one of three friendly spirits ("Wolf", "Otter", and "Eagle"). It features a similar bonus system to Undefined Fantastic Object, with "Spirit Items" (based on the three animals) that activate special effects when collected in groups of five. The game was released on Steam on September 9, 2019.


== Other media ==
Team Shanghai Alice has expanded the Touhou Project to media beyond the original games, releasing several print works and music albums that are considered part of the series.


=== Music CDs ===
Ten music albums have been released by ZUN, each containing original tracks in addition to new arrangements of music from the games. These albums are Dolls in Pseudo Paradise (蓬莱人形, Hōrai Ningyō, 2002-12-30), Ghostly Field Club (蓮台野夜行, Rendaino Yakō, 2003-12-30), Changeability of Strange Dream (夢違科学世紀, Yumetagae Kagaku Seiki, 2004-12-30), Retrospective 53 minutes (卯酉東海道, Bōyu Tōkaidō, 2006-05-21), Magical Astronomy (大空魔術, Ōzora Majutsu, 2006-08-13), Unknown Flower, Mesmerizing Journey (未知の花　魅知の旅, Michi no Haba, Michi no Tabi, 2011-05-08), Trojan Green Asteroid (鳥船遺跡, Torifune Iseki, 2012-04-30), Neo-traditionalism of Japan (伊弉諾物質, Izanagi Busshitsu, 2012-08-11), Dr. Latency's Freak Report (燕石博物誌, Enseki Hakubutsushi, 2016-05-08), and Dateless Bar "Old Adam" (旧約酒場, Kyūyaku Sakaba, 2016-08-13). Each CD (with the exceptions of Dolls in Pseudo Paradise and Unknown Flower, Mesmerizing Journey) comes with a bonus story written by ZUN about the "Secret Sealing Club" (秘封倶楽部, Hifuu Kurabu), a self-described "club of necromancers" consisting of Kyoto university students Renko Usami and Maribel Hearn. They are among the only humans in the Outside World who know of Gensokyo, discussing it in the stories along with other paranormal topics.
In 2006 and 2007, ZUN released Akyu's Untouched Score (幺樂団の歴史, Yōgakudan no Rekishi), a five-volume set of soundtracks from the PC-98 games that includes several unused themes. Official soundtracks for Immaterial and Missing Power, Scarlet Weather Rhapsody, Touhou Hisoutensoku, Hopeless Masquerade, Urban Legend in Limbo, and Antimony of Common Flowers have also been released. Several other music CDs have been released as accompaniments to official print media; these releases are listed below.


=== Print media ===
Curiosities of Lotus Asia (東方香霖堂, Tōhō Kōrindō, lit "Eastern Hall of the Perfumed Rain")
Written by ZUN himself, Curiosities of Lotus Asia is a story published in installments. First it was published in the Colorful Puregirl magazine, but was moved to Magazine Elfics of the BiBLOS company after the discontinuation of the former. However, as BiBLOS went bankrupt, the series was moved again. Finally, it was published in the magazine Dengeki Moeoh between the August and December 2007 issues. In addition, some installments of Curiosities of Lotus Asia were published on the Elnavi website. A compilation was released on September 30, 2010 by ASCII Media Works. In 2015, a continuation of the series was featured in the Touhou-only magazine Strange Creators of Outer World. The protagonist Rinnosuke Morichika is the only humanoid male character shown in Touhou. The main subject of this publication is about Kourindou (香霖堂), an old tool shop run by Rinnosuke.Touhou Sangetsusei (東方三月精, lit. "Eastern Three Fairies")
Touhou Sangetsusei is a manga being published in Comp Ace. The story centers around three fairies and their daily mischiefs, adventures, and chance meetings. The base story is written by ZUN, and the art is drawn by selected dōjin manga artists. The first part, Eastern and Little Nature Deity, is drawn by Nemu Matsukura. Starting May 2006, Matsukura stopped drawing the manga for health reasons, and that responsibility was given to Makoto Hirasaka, who became the sole illustrator of Touhou Sangetsusei henceafter. Thus a second version of Touhou Sangetsusei is published, titled Strange and Bright Nature Deity. In January 2009, Strange and Bright Nature Deity ended and was replaced by the third part, titled Oriental Sacred Place in May 2009. The game Fairy Wars, released on August 14, 2010, is a spinoff of the manga. In January 2016, Touhou Sangetsusei continued with the fourth version, Visionary Fairies in Shrine, after a four-year hiatus since the end of Oriental Sacred Place.
Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red (東方文花帖, Tōhō Bunkachō, lit. "Oriental Album of Words and Flowers")
Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red is the official fanbook of the Touhou series. The book includes mock newspaper articles by Aya Shameimaru, an interview of ZUN, and a compilation of some dōjinshi. A CD-ROM is attached to the back cover, and in it are new music tracks by ZUN, a demo of Phantasmagoria of Flower View, and a wallpaper of the book's cover. Prominent within this book is the usage of an alternate calendar system called the "Youkai Lunisolar Calendar."Seasonal Dream Vision (東方紫香花, Tōhō Shikōbana, lit. "Eastern Purple Scented Flowers")
Seasonal Dream Vision is an anthology of dōjinshi published by Comic Toranoana. Also included is ZUN's short story related to Phantasmagoria of Flower View and a CD of various rearrangements of his music.Perfect Memento in Strict Sense (東方求聞史紀, Tōhō Gumonshiki, lit. "Desired Oral Histories of the East")
Perfect Memento in Strict Sense is a guide and bestiary of Gensokyo, as told by Hieda no Akyu. It was released in late December 2006, published by Ichijinsha, but was originally slated for August of that year. A manga that uses the story's premise is published in the December 2006 issue of the Comic Rex magazine. It is about a fictional "Gensokyo Chronicles" that Akyu supposedly published in Gensokyo in the 121st season.Touhou Bōgetsushō (東方儚月抄, lit. "Eastern Dark Moon Vignette")
Touhou Bōgetsushō is a continuation of the story from Imperishable Night. It consists of a manga, a novel, and a yonkoma serialized in three Ichijinsha magazines. The manga Silent Sinner in Blue  began serialization in the Comic Rex magazine in the July 2007 issue. Drawn by Aki-Eda, the manga focuses on the human characters Reimu and Marisa. The novel Cage in Lunatic Runagate was serialized in the quarterly Chara-Mel magazine, debuting on June 25, 2007. It is illustrated by Tokiame, and the plot being a deep submersion into the manga, taking a non-human perspective. Finally, the yonkoma The Inaba of the Moon and the Inaba of the Earth (月のイナバと地上の因幡, Tsuki no Inaba to Chijō no Inaba), illustrated by Arata Toshihira, is a light-hearted discursion from the main story, featuring Reisen and Tewi Inaba. It debuted in the August 2007 issue of the Manga 4-koma Kings Palette magazine, which was sold on June 22, 2007.Grimoire of Marisa (グリモワール オブ マリサ, Gurimowaru obu Marisa)
Grimoire of Marisa is a book purported to be Marisa Kirisame's notebook recording the noteworthy spell cards that she has encountered. It is written by ZUN and illustrated by Takeshi Moriki for the contents and Genji Asai for the cover. It was published in July 2009.Wild and Horned Hermit (東方茨歌仙, Tōhō Ibarakasen, lit. "Eastern Thorned Song Hermit")
Wild and Horned Hermit is a manga which started serialization on July 24, 2010 in volume one of Ichijinsha's Chara Mel Febri. Written by ZUN with art by Aya Azuma, it introduces the new character Kasen Ibara.Symposium of Post-mysticism (東方求聞口授, Tōhō Gumon Kuju, lit "Desired Oral Teachings of the East")
Symposium of Post-mysticism is a book written by ZUN and illustrated by Masakichi, Tokiame, Azuma Aya, Masatoki Asakura and Kitsune, and was released on April 27, 2012. The contents cover information of almost every Touhou character from Mountain of Faith to Ten Desires, in addition to a series of mock newspaper articles from the Bunbunmaru Newspaper and Kakashi Spirit News explaining aspects of Touhou lore.Forbidden Scrollery (東方鈴奈庵, Tōhō Suzunaan)
Forbidden Scrollery is a manga series written by ZUN and illustrated by the young female artist Moe Harukawa. It debuted in the December 2012 issue of Comp Ace. It received an official English-translated release by Yen Press.Strange Creators of Outer World (東方外來韋編, Tōhō Gairai Ihen)
Strange Creators of Outer World is an official Touhou-only magazine published by ASCII Media Works and supervised by ZUN. It features interviews with ZUN and other Touhou dōjin creators, a continuation of Curiosities of Lotus Asia, and manga by dōjinshi artists. The first issue was released on September 30, 2015.Alternative Facts in Eastern Utopia (東方文果真報, Tōhō Bunka Shinhō)
Alternative Facts in Eastern Utopia is an official Touhou book released on March 30, 2017. It is presented as Aya Shameimaru's attempt to create a tabloid magazine in the style of those from the outside world, which she eventually cancelled and left unpublished. The book features in-universe articles, interviews and advertisements similar to the earlier Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red, but in a significantly more chaotic and haphazard format.


== Gameplay ==
In the shooting games, the player's bullet power increases on a linear scale as the player collects power-ups dropped by enemies, and eventually maxes out. The player can also collect 'point' icons to earn extra lives; the amount needed grows exponentially as the player's score rises. The player can use 'focus', the shift key by default, which slows down the player's movement, makes the collision box visible, and (generally; some characters are reversed) focuses the player's attack to make it more powerful. The graze counter, missing from Mountain of Faith and Story of Eastern Wonderland, tracks how many bullets entered the character sprite but avoided the collision box, and rewards the player with a score bonus for living on the edge.
The player can use a weapon called a 'spell card', which is similar to a 'bomb' in most other shooting games. While the player has a limited number, using one makes the user temporarily invulnerable and uses a special magical attack that generally clears the screen. Each character has two cards with different names and patterns. The player can use one during a short period after being hit by a bullet (known as the 'border between life and death') to avoid loss of a life. The amount of time the player has available to use the border is usually around 0.3 seconds. Bosses also have spell cards, but with bosses the term applies to a prolonged pattern of movements and shots that lasts until the player depletes the boss' health by a certain amount or the time runs out, not a one-shot attack.
Each individual game of the main series from Perfect Cherry Blossom to Ten Desires has additional items that affect some aspect of gameplay, such as scoring or gaining extra lives/bombs. For example, Perfect Cherry Blossom has "cherry points", which are used mostly in scoring, but can grant temporary invulnerability (known as 'supernatural border'); Imperishable Night has "time points", which are essential for advancing to later stages, and also determine if the player gets to challenge a boss's 'final spell' on normal or higher difficulties; Mountain of Faith has 'faith' points, which boost the score the player receives upon gathering point items and bonuses for clearing spell cards without dying or using a spell card.
Each Touhou game has four difficulty levels—easy, normal, hard, and lunatic—with each one being harder than the previous one. Regardless of difficulty choice, there are six stages in each game and each one is harder than the previous. The only exceptions to this are Story of Eastern Wonderland, and Embodiment of Scarlet Devil on easy difficulty, both of which only have five stages.
In addition to the four main difficulties, there is an extra stage which is a long and difficult stage in which players must play through hordes of enemies, and an especially long boss fight (usually with ten spell cards). In order to reach the extra stage, one must beat the game on normal difficulty or higher without the use of a continue. The only games that allow players to reach the extra stage by completing the easy difficulty are Story of Eastern Wonderland, Mystic Square, Perfect Cherry Blossom, Imperishable Night, Fairy Wars, Double Dealing Character, Legacy of Lunatic Kingdom, and Wily Beast and Weakest Creature. In terms of difficulty, the extra stage is around the normal difficulty level or above. In Perfect Cherry Blossom, there is also a phantasm extra stage in which the enemies that were already difficult in the extra stage have become even more challenging. Although the phantasm stage is aimed for the most experienced players, the difficulty is somewhere in between hard and lunatic. The phantasm stage is accessed by beating the extra stage and capturing at least 60 spells with any of the characters and weapon types combined.


== Plot ==


=== Background ===
The plots of the Touhou Project revolve around the strange phenomena that occur in the fictional realm of Gensokyo (幻想郷, Gensōkyō, literally Fantasy Village or Fantasy Land), which ZUN designed with a human village in the grounds of some remote mountain recesses in Japan. Originally, it was simply called "a remote separated land of a human village in an eastern country." Long before Touhou Project's story begins, there lived many non-humans like yōkai as well as some humans in the area. After a few humans lost their way into Gensokyo, humans became afraid of approaching this area, although others settled here for the sake of yōkai extermination. However, as time went on, humans developed civilization and multiplied in number, and thus the yōkai became distressed about how this would affect the balance between humans and yōkai. Thus, 500 years before Embodiment of Scarlet Devil (EoSD), the yōkai sage Yukari Yakumo developed the "boundary of phantasm and substance," which was favored by the yōkai and protected the balance. This was called the "Yōkai Expansion Project" and made Gensokyo a phantasmal world that automatically called out to the weakened yōkai of the outside world. Other things that disappear from the outside world, like extinct animals, lost tools, and architecture, also became abundant in Gensokyo. Since Gensokyo was a plot of land in Japan that was separated by a barrier, it is Japan that is immediately outside of this barrier.
As a result of the seal, Gensokyo became inaccessible from the outside world, and similarly, those in Gensokyo were unable to leave. Gensokyo's existence could not be confirmed from the outside world, nor could the outside world be confirmed within Gensokyo. As a result, the isolated community developed its own civilization, different from that of the outside world. Although separated by a barrier, it is a bordering world to its outside, as opposed to being in a parallel universe. There are no seas in Gensokyo, since it is an inland mountain. In Gensokyo, there are few humans, and various kinds of yōkai. Some species include magicians, beasts, therianthropies, vampires, bōrei, tengu, mermaids, kappa, and yōkai (a kind of miscellaneous group). There are others species that could be yōkai depending on definition, like fairies, spirits, yūrei, onryō, poltergeists, hermits, oni, and gods.
In present Gensokyo, which is presented in all Touhou Project games since EoSD, as opposed to the outside world where unscientific phenomena were dismissed as "superstition" by the time of the Meiji era, magical and spiritual qualities prevail. The only known gateway from the outside world into Gensokyo is the Hakurei Shrine on the border of Gensokyo. The spell card rules were also established to keep up the relationship between humans and yōkai in a mock style, which was necessary for the preservation of the balance of Gensokyo. The "Great Hakurei Barrier," managed by Hakurei Miko, was constructed  several decades before EoSD, which is described as a "barrier of common sense," and is thus a strong logical barrier that not even yōkai can pass through. The yōkai were at first against its construction, but then gradually understood its usefulness.


=== In-game events ===
In Gensokyo, events called "incidents" occur once in a while. An incident is an event that affects all of Gensokyo and is of unknown cause at the time it occurs. Touhou Project mainly focuses on incidents in its stories, but there are also works like Mountain of Faith that are about events other than incidents.
Frequently, incidents are due to a yōkai's whim or curiosity, and usually Reimu Hakurei would go to investigate it and then find and chastise the perpetrator. Usually, the shrine maiden of the Hakurei Shrine resolves incidents, but there are cases where Marisa Kirisame and other imitators would resolve them. When a major incident occurs, the spirits and fairies are affected by the circumstances, the incident, and the perpetrator, and experience an increase in power for the duration incident, so there are also cases where a mere fairy defeats Reimu. It has additionally been stated that people of the village also go out to resolve incidents.


=== Characters ===

With its focus on bishōjo characters, the Touhou series possesses a large cast compared to other shooting games. While they aren't developed nearly to the standards of a story-based game, many players love them, and even obscure stage bosses who only appear once have a fanbase. One example is Hong Meiling, affectionately known as Chūgoku (China), the stage 3 boss of Embodiment of Scarlet Devil, who won a popularity contest in Japan out of all Touhou characters. Among the vast array of characters, only six named characters are male. One (Genjii) is a turtle, one is a cat (Sokrates), two (Youki Konpaku and Myouren Hijiri) are only mentioned in passing, one (Rinnosuke Morichika) is only featured in the serialized novel, and the last (Unzan) is a cloud-like entity. There is also one before all these (Shingyoku), but this character has three forms of different genders, so this character may not exactly be male.
Though each game features a collection of different characters, the main protagonist of the series is always Reimu Hakurei, joined by Marisa Kirisame after the second game. Exceptions to this include Shoot the Bullet and Double Spoiler (Aya Shameimaru is playable on both, and Hatate Himekaidou can become playable in Double Spoiler); Fairy Wars (which has Cirno as the sole playable character); Impossible Spell Card (where only Seija Kijin is playable); and Violet Detector (where only Sumireko Usami is playable).


== Development ==
The Touhou Project is a one-man project by a Japanese game maker, Jun'ya Ōta (usually under the pseudonym ZUN), who does all the graphics, music, and programming alone for the bullet hell games, with the exceptions of the portrait art in Fairy Wars, which is by Makoto Hirasaka, and the fighting games, Immaterial and Missing Power, Scarlet Weather Rhapsody, Touhou Hisōtensoku, Hopeless Masquerade, and Urban Legend in Limbo, which were dual efforts with Twilight Frontier.
The idea of Touhou first came to ZUN during his high school years, when shrine maiden-themed games were in the minority. "It would be nice to make shrine maiden games," he thought, and often imagined the music that would go with such games. He went to college, hoping to compose music for fighting games, since they were popular at the time due to Street Fighter II. However, he decided that in order to put his music into games, it would be easier to make his own game to go with it, thus the first Touhou game, Highly Responsive to Prayers, was released in 1996. The first game was originally intended as a practice in programming. Touhou only became a shooting game series starting from the second game, because the popularity of shooting games had revived due to RayForce and ZUN had long been a fan of such games. ZUN remarked how the general theme and direction of Touhou only started coming together in the sixth game, Embodiment of Scarlet Devil.ZUN develops his games with Visual Studio, Adobe Photoshop, and Cubase, according to his interview in Bohemian Archive in Japanese Red.


== Reception and fanworks ==

A prodigious number of derivative works based on Touhou have been created since the release of Embodiment of Scarlet Devil. These include dōjinshi, dōjin music, dōjin anime, and dōjin games (even though the Touhou games themselves are dōjin games). The vast scope of Touhou derivatives prompted commentary, noting that Touhou Project became an unmissable aspect of Japanese consumer generated media. These dōjin activities are mostly responsible for adding original attributes to characters that ZUN may not have intended. ZUN, for the most part, had acknowledged, appreciated, and even encouraged these derivative works by imposing very few restrictions on the use of his works. The major restrictions are on unauthorized commercial distribution (as opposed to dōjin) and the spoiling of endings; proper attribution to Team Shanghai Alice is a recommendation. ZUN stated himself that he did not want the Touhou Project game series to be officially commercialized.
The first recent publication of Touhou derivative doujinshi occurred during December 2003, following the release of Perfect Cherry Blossom; seven circles sold Touhou derivative works at Comiket 65 in December 2003. At the Comiket 74 in August 2008, a total of 885 circles had Touhou derivative works on display or for sale, out of a total of 35,000 circles participating at Comiket. At Comiket 77 (December 2009), 2,372 circles were dedicated to Touhou, breaking the previous record held by The Prince of Tennis at Comiket 66 (August 2004), which had 2,130 circles. At Comiket 85 (December 2013), Touhou was still in the lead, with 2,272 participating circles selling Touhou derivatives, far outpacing those of other franchises.The dōjin games based on Touhou include adaptations of other game series' mechanics with Touhou characters, such as Komajou Densetsu: Scarlet Symphony (a parody of the Castlevania games with the title being a play on the Japanese title of the series, Akumajō Dracula), Age of Ethanols (based on the Age of Empires series), and Touhou Puppet Dance Performance (based on the Pokémon games). The music of Touhou is also very popular and many arrangement CDs can be found for sale at Comiket and other Japanese conventions.At Tokyo Game Show 2014, ZUN announced a collaborative project with PlayStation bringing unofficial, fan-made Touhou Project dōjin games to the PlayStation 4 (PS4) and PlayStation Vita platforms. As of September 2014, Fushigi no Gensōkyō 3 (不思議の幻想郷3) by Aqua Style, Touhou Aogami Engi: The Genius of Sappheiros (東方蒼神縁起) by Strawberry Bose and Touhou Sky Arena Matsuri (東方スカイアリーナ祭) by Area-Zero have been announced for release on the PS4. The games will be published by Mediascape, under contract by Sony Computer Entertainment and ZUN, as part of a move towards embracing indie games for commercial distribution on PlayStation platforms.Among the most popular derivatives are the series of Flash videos created by the dōjin music circle IOSYS. Many of them, one of which is "Marisa Stole the Precious Thing," are popular on otaku internet forums and Nico Nico Douga.

A major internet meme based on Touhou is "Yukkuri shite itte ne!!!" (ゆっくりしていってね!!!, often translated as "You should be taking it easy!!!"), which centers around the disembodied, deformed heads of Touhou characters, often referred to as "yukkuris". This meme originated from a disfigured attempt to draw the main characters Reimu and Marisa with Shift JIS art. Yukkuris became so popular that the phrase "Yukkuri shite itte ne!!!" won bronze for 2008's "Net Slang of the Year" in Japan. Yukkuris also appear in Internet advertisements, the anime Natsu no Arashi! and Pani Poni Dash!, and most notably, the front page of 2channel, the largest Internet forum in the world. Yuyuko Saigyouji and Reimu Hakurei also make cameo character appearances in Square Enix's game Lord of Vermilion Re:2.A short derivative animated project, Anime Tenchou x Touhou Project (アニメ店長 x 東方Project) was produced by Ufotable in celebration of the 10th anniversary of Japanese goods chain Animate as a promotional video for the store combining the world of Touhou with Animate's mascot, Meito Anizawa. Several fanmade anime have also been made for Touhou. A dōjin anime project by the dōjin circle Maikaze, titled A Summer Day's Dream (夢想夏郷), is a fan-made anime adaptation with an original plot featuring Touhou characters, with four episodes released from 2008 to 2016, and the 2.5th episode released in 2014; the last episode will be released in 2020. Albeit created by an amateur studio, the project featured professional voice actors. Another dōjin anime by the circle Manpuku Jinja, titled Fantasy Kaleidoscope ~ The Memories of Phantasm (幻想万華鏡) (without voice dubbing but have background music and sound), was released at Comiket 80 in 2011, with one episode released based on the storyline of Perfect Cherry Blossom, and there are 12 episodes as of 2019.
Kyoto Fantasy Troupe, a Chinese dōjin circle, made a dōjin anime titled Hifuu Club Activity Record ~ The Sealed Esoteric History (秘封活动记录). The first episode was released at Comiket 89 in late 2015 and Chengdu TouhouOnly05 in early 2016, and it also featured professional Japanese voice actors when it was released again later. The second episode was released in 2017. Another Chinese dōjin circle, Perpetual Motion Niche, is also making a dōjin anime titled Secluded Magic Instrument~ Meteors of Triple Dimension (幽幻天仪盘), which is about the story of the collision of three worlds——the forgotten Eastern Country (in the PC-98 games), Gensokyo (in the Windows games) and the outside world; the first episode was released in Q3 2017.
The Touhou Project was nominated for the 11th annual Media Arts Awards held by Japan's Agency for Cultural Affairs, under the Entertainment category, where Touhou Project eventually lost to Nintendo's Wii Sports for the Grand Prize award.


=== Reitaisai ===
The Hakurei Shrine Reitaisai (博麗神社例大祭, Hakurei Jinja Reitaisai, Hakurei Shrine's Regular Grand Festival) is the largest of the many dōjin conventions hosting only Touhou content.  Although the coordinator of this convention has nothing to do with Team Shanghai Alice officially, the name "Hakurei Shrine Reitaisai" was given by ZUN himself. It first started in the year 2004 as a way for Team Shanghai Alice to publicly distribute the trial version for their upcoming games to the fans well in advance of releasing them on the internet; in addition, the 2004 Reitaisai featured a total of 114 participating circles. Since then, many Touhou derivative works are also gathered and sold there. Commencing every year in April or May, the convention has been hosted in Ōta, Tokyo in 2004; Naka-ku, Yokohama in 2005; Sunshine City, Tokyo in 2006 and 2007; and the Tokyo Big Sight in 2008 and after. The year 2010 saw the birth of Reitaisai SP, an additional Reitaisai to be held every autumn due to increasing popularity, but Reitaisai SP was canceled after 2011. The 2011 Reitaisai was originally canceled due to safety concerns after the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, and the release of Ten Desires was also postponed. It was later rescheduled and held on May 8, 2011, with approximately 4,940 participating circles. In addition to events in Japan, there is another Reitaisai held in Taiwan starting in 2015.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Team Shanghai Alice, the official website of the group (in Japanese)
Twilight Frontier, creators of Immaterial and Missing Power, Scarlet Weather Rhapsody and Touhou Hisoutensoku (in Japanese)
Touhou Wiki, a multiligual unofficial fan wiki on the Touhou Project, includes both encyclopedia articles and dōjin creations
Touhou Wiki, a Japanese unofficial fan wiki on the Touhou Project, mainly focuses on official content encyclopedia (in Japanese)
ZUN×PlayStation Collaboration official website (in Japanese)