2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries

The 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries and caucuses will be a series of electoral contests organized by the Democratic Party to select the approximately 3,769 pledged delegates to the Democratic National Convention. Those delegates shall, by pledged votes, elect the Democratic nominee for president of the United States in the 2020 U.S. presidential election. The elections are scheduled to take place from February to June 2020 in all fifty U.S. states, the District of Columbia, five U.S. territories, and Democrats Abroad.
Independently of the result of primaries and caucuses, the Democratic Party will, from its group of party leaders and elected officials, also appoint 765 unpledged delegates (superdelegates) to participate in its national convention. In contrast to all previous election cycles, superdelegates will no longer have the right to cast decisive votes at the convention's first ballot for the presidential nomination (limiting their voting rights to either non-decisive votes on the first ballot or decisive votes for subsequent ballots on a contested convention).The field of major Democratic presidential candidates in the 2020 election peaked at more than two dozen. As of November 24, 2019, 18 major candidates are seeking the Democratic presidential nomination in 2020. The October 15, 2019, Democratic presidential debate in Westerville, Ohio, featured 12 candidates, setting a record for the highest number of candidates in one presidential debate.


== Background ==
After Hillary Clinton's loss in the previous election, many felt the Democratic Party lacked a clear leader. Divisions remained in the party following the 2016 primaries, which pitted Clinton against Bernie Sanders. Between the 2016 election and the 2018 midterm elections, Senate Democrats have generally shifted to the political left in relation to college tuition, healthcare, and immigration. The 2018 elections saw the Democratic Party regain the House of Representatives for the first time in eight years, picking up seats in both urban and suburban districts.Soon after the 2016 general election, the division between Clinton and Sanders supporters was highlighted in the 2017 Democratic National Committee chairmanship election between Tom Perez and Keith Ellison. Perez was narrowly elected chairman and subsequently appointed Ellison as the Deputy Chair, a largely ceremonial role.The 2020 field of Democratic presidential candidates peaked at more than two dozen candidates. According to Politifact, this field is believed to be the largest field of presidential candidates for any American political party since 1972; it exceeds the field of 17 major candidates that sought the Republican presidential nomination in 2016. In May 2019, CBS News referred to the field of 2020 Democratic presidential candidates as "the largest and most diverse Democratic primary field in modern history", including at least six female presidential candidates. As of October 24, 2019, 18 major candidates are seeking the Democratic presidential nomination in 2020.


=== Reforms since 2016 ===

On August 25, 2018, the Democratic National Committee (DNC) members passed reforms to the Democratic Party's primary process in order to increase participation and ensure transparency. State parties are encouraged to use a government-run primary whenever available and increase the accessibility of their primary through same-day or automatic registration and same-day party switching. Caucuses are required to have absentee voting, or to otherwise allow those who cannot participate in person to be included.The new reforms also regulate how the Democratic National Convention shall handle the outcome of primaries and caucuses for three potential scenarios:
If a single candidate wins at least 2,268 pledged delegates: Superdelegates will be allowed to vote at first ballot, as their influence can not overturn the majority of pledged delegates.
If a single candidate wins 1,886–2,267 pledged delegates: Superdelegates will be barred from voting at first ballot, which solely will be decided by the will of pledged delegates.
If no candidate wins more than 1,885 pledged delegates: This will result in a contested convention, where superdelegates are barred from voting at the first formal ballot, but regain their right to vote for their preferred presidential nominee for all subsequent ballots needed until the delegates reach a majority.The reforms mandate that superdelegates refrain from voting on the first presidential nominating ballot, unless a candidate via the outcome of primaries and caucuses already has gained enough votes (more than 50% of all delegate votes) among only the elected pledged delegates. The prohibition for superdelegates to vote at the first ballot for the last two mentioned scenarios, does not preclude superdelegates from publicly endorsing a candidate of their choosing before the convention.In a contested convention where no majority of minimum 1,886 pledged delegate votes is found for a single candidate in the first ballot, all superdelegates will then regain their right to vote on any subsequent ballot necessary in order for a presidential candidate to be nominated (raising the majority needed for such to 2,267 votes).


== Candidates ==
Major candidates in the 2020 Democratic presidential primaries have either: (a) served as vice president, a member of the cabinet, a U.S. senator, a U.S. representative, or a governor, (b) been included in a minimum of five independent national polls, or (c) received substantial media coverage.More than 250 candidates who did not meet the criteria to be deemed major candidates also filed with the Federal Election Commission to run for president in the Democratic Party primary.


=== Current candidates ===
The following list of current candidates includes major candidates that have filed with the Federal Election Commission to run for president in the 2020 Democratic primary, have officially announced their respective candidacies, and have not withdrawn their candidacies. As of November 24, 2019, the total number of current major candidates is 18, five of whom are female, four of whom are less than 50 years old, and four of whom are 70 years or older.

Other notable candidates who have not suspended their respective campaigns include:


==== On the ballot in at least one state ====
Ben Gleib, actor, comedian, satirist, and writer
Henry Hewes, real estate developer; Right to Life nominee for Mayor of New York City in 1989 and U.S. Senate from New York in 1994
Sam Sloan, chess player, publisher and political figure
Robby Wells, former college football coach


==== Not on the ballot anywhere ====
Harry Braun, renewable energy consultant and researcher; Democratic nominee for U.S. representative from AZ-01 in 1984 and 1986
Ken Nwadike Jr., documentary filmmaker, motivational speaker, and peace activist


=== Withdrew before the primaries ===
The candidates in this section were major candidates who withdrew or suspended their campaigns before the 2020 Democratic primary elections began.

The following notable individuals who did not meet the criteria to become major candidates have terminated their campaigns:

Ami Horowitz, conservative activist and documentary filmmaker (Endorsed Trump)
Brian Moore, activist; Green nominee for U.S. Senate from Florida in 2006; Socialist and Liberty Union nominee for President in 2008


=== Declined to be candidates ===
These individuals have been the subject of presidential speculation, but have publicly denied or recanted interest in running for president.


== Political positions of candidates ==


== Debates ==

In December 2018, the Democratic National Committee (DNC) announced the preliminary schedule for 12 official DNC-sanctioned debates, set to begin in June 2019, with six debates in 2019 and the remaining six during the first four months of 2020. Candidates are allowed to participate in forums featuring multiple other candidates as long as only one candidate appears on stage at a time; if candidates participate in any unsanctioned debate with other presidential candidates, they will lose their invitation to the next DNC-sanctioned debate.If any debates will be scheduled to take place with a location in the first four primary/caucus states (Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada, and South Carolina), the DNC has decided such debates, at the earliest, will be held in 2020. The DNC also announced that it would not partner with Fox News as a media sponsor for any debates. Fox News had last held a Democratic debate in 2003. All media sponsors selected to host a debate will as a new rule be required to appoint at least one female moderator for each debate, to ensure there will not be a gender skewed treatment of the candidates and debate topics.


== Primary election polling ==

The following graph depicts the evolution of the standing of each candidate in the poll aggregators since December 2018.


== Timeline ==


=== 2017 ===
In the weeks following the election of Donald Trump in the 2016 election, media speculation regarding potential candidates for the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries began to circulate. As the Senate began confirmation hearings for members of the cabinet, speculation centered on the prospects of the "hell-no caucus”, six senators who went on to vote against the majority of Trump's nominees. According to Politico, the members of the "hell-no caucus" were Cory Booker, Kamala Harris, Kirsten Gillibrand, Bernie Sanders, Jeff Merkley, and Elizabeth Warren. Other speculation centered on then-Vice-President Joe Biden making a third presidential bid following failed attempts in 1988 and 2008. Biden had previously served as U.S. senator from Delaware (1973–2009).July 28: Representative John Delaney of Maryland announced his candidacy in an op-ed in The Washington Post, which broke the record for earliest candidacy declaration in history.
November 6: Tech entrepreneur Andrew Yang of New York announced his candidacy.


=== 2018 ===

In August 2018, Democratic Party officials and television networks began discussions as to the nature and scheduling of the following year's debates and the nomination process. Changes were made to the role of superdelegates, deciding to only allow them to vote on the first ballot if the nomination is uncontested. The Democratic National Committee (DNC) announced the preliminary schedule for the 12 official DNC-sanctioned debates, set to begin in June 2019, with six debates in 2019 and the remaining six during the first four months of 2020.
On November 6, 2018, the 2018 midterm elections were held. The election was widely characterized as a "blue wave" election. Mass canvassing, voter registration drives and deep engagement techniques drove turnout high. Despite this, eventual presidential candidates U.S. Representative Beto O'Rourke of Texas and State Senator Richard Ojeda of West Virginia both lost their respective races.August

August 25: The Democratic Party began planning debates and eliminated first ballot decisive votes for superdelegates.November

November 6: The 2018 midterm elections were held.
November 11: State Senator Richard Ojeda of West Virginia announced his candidacy.
November 15: Spiritual teacher and author Marianne Williamson of California formed an exploratory committee.
November 19: Ojeda held a campaign launch rally in Louisville, Kentucky.December

December 12: Former Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Julian Castro of Texas formed an exploratory committee.
December 31: Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts formed an exploratory committee. She had long been touted as a potential presidential candidate. In 2015, Warren was the object of a draft movement to run in the 2016 Democratic Party presidential primaries, despite repeated denials of interest in doing so.


=== 2019 ===


==== January ====
January 11: U.S. Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii announced her candidacy during an interview on The Van Jones Show.
January 12: Castro officially announced his candidacy at a rally in San Antonio, Texas.
January 15: Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York announced the formation of an exploratory committee during an interview on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert.
January 21: Senator Kamala Harris of California announced her candidacy during an interview on Good Morning America.
January 23: Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Indiana, formed an exploratory committee.
January 25: Ojeda dropped out of the race.
January 27: Harris held a campaign launch rally in Oakland, California.
January 28: Williamson announced her candidacy at a rally in Los Angeles, California.


==== February ====
February 1: Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey announced his candidacy.
February 2: Gabbard held a campaign launch rally in Honolulu, Hawaii.
February 9: Warren announced her candidacy at a rally in Lawrence, Massachusetts.
February 10: Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota announced her candidacy at a rally in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
February 19: Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont announced his candidacy via an email to supporters and appeared on Vermont Public Radio as well as CBS This Morning as part of his campaign launch.


==== March ====
March 1: Governor Jay Inslee of Washington announced his candidacy.
March 2: Sanders held a campaign launch rally at Brooklyn College in Brooklyn, New York.
March 4: Former governor John Hickenlooper of Colorado announced his candidacy.
March 7: Hickenlooper held a campaign launch rally in Denver, Colorado.
March 11: The DNC announced Milwaukee, Wisconsin, as the site of the 2020 Democratic National Convention.
March 13: Mayor Wayne Messam of Miramar, Florida, formed an exploratory committee.
March 14: Former Representative Beto O'Rourke of Texas announced his candidacy.
March 17: Gillibrand formally announced her candidacy via an online video.
March 19: An exploratory committee was formed on behalf of former Senator Mike Gravel of Alaska.
March 24: Gillibrand held a campaign launch rally outside of Trump Tower in New York City.
March 28: Messam formally announced his candidacy in an online video.
March 30:
O'Rourke held a campaign launch rally on the Mexico–United States border in El Paso, Texas.
The Heartland Forum was held in Buena Vista University, Storm Lake, Iowa by the Open Markets Institute Action, HuffPost, Storm Lake Times, and the Iowa Farmers Union. Issues affecting rural Americans were discussed.


==== April ====
April 1: The We the People Membership Summit was held in Warner Theatre, Washington, D.C. by the Center for Popular Democracy Action, Communications Workers of America, Planned Parenthood Action Fund, Service Employees International Union, SEIU 32BJ, Sierra Club. Issues like Democracy reform were discussed.
April 4: Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio announced his candidacy and appeared on The View as part of a campaign launch.
April 8:
Mike Gravel formally announced his candidacy in an online video.
Representative Eric Swalwell of California announced his candidacy during an interview on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert.
April 13: Cory Booker held a campaign launch rally in Newark, New Jersey.
April 14:
Pete Buttigieg announced his candidacy at a rally in South Bend, Indiana.
Eric Swalwell held a campaign launch rally at Dublin High School in Dublin, California.
April 22: Representative Seth Moulton of Massachusetts announced his candidacy in an online video.
April 24: The She the People Presidential Forum was held at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas by She the People.
April 25: Former Vice President Joe Biden of Delaware announced his candidacy in an online video.
April 27: The National Forum on Wages and Working People: Creating an Economy that Works for All was held at Enclave, Las Vegas, Nevada by the Service Employees International Union and the Center for American Progress Action Fund.
April 29: Joe Biden held a campaign launch rally at a union hall in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.


==== May ====
May 2: Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado announced his candidacy during an interview on CBS This Morning.
May 14: Governor Steve Bullock of Montana announced his candidacy in an online video.
May 16: Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York City announced his candidacy in an online video and appeared on Good Morning America as part of a campaign launch.
May 31: The Unity and Freedom Forum was held at Hilton Pasadena, Pasadena, California by FIRM Action, Community Change Action, and the CHIRLA Action Fund.
May 31–June 2: The California State Democratic Convention, a major "cattle call" event attended by most major candidates, took place.


==== June ====
June 1: The Big Ideas Forum was held at Warfield Theatre, San Francisco, California by MoveOn.
June 5: Iowa Democrats' Hall of Fame Dinner, a "cattle call" event featuring 19 candidates, took place.
June 12: This was the deadline to qualify for the first Democratic debate.
June 13: The Democratic National Committee announced that 20 candidates will participate in the first official debate on June 26–27.
June 15: The Presidential Candidates Forum was held by the Black Economic Alliance at Charleston Music Hall, Charleston, South Carolina.
June 17: The Poor People's Campaign Presidential Forum was held at Trinity Washington University, Washington, D.C. by Poor People's Campaign.
June 21: The NALEO Presidential Candidate Forum was held at Telemundo Center, Miami, Florida by the NALEO.
June 22:
Former Representative Joe Sestak of Pennsylvania announced his candidacy with a midnight campaign website launch.
The South Carolina Democratic Party Convention was held at the Columbia Convention Center, Columbia, South Carolina by the South Carolina Democratic Party.
The We Decide: 2020 Election Membership Forum was held at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina by the Planned Parenthood Action Fund.
June 26: The first part of the first official debate was held in Miami, Florida.
June 27: The second part of the first official debate was held in Miami, Florida.


==== July ====
July 5: The Strong Public Schools Presidential Forum was held at the George R. Brown Convention Center, Houston, Texas by the National Education Association.
July 8: Eric Swalwell dropped out of the race and announced he would run for re-election to his seat in the House of Representatives in 2020.
July 9: Billionaire hedge fund manager Tom Steyer announced his candidacy in an online video.
July 11: The League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC) Presidential Candidates Forum was held at the Wisconsin Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, by the LULAC and Univision.
July 11–13, 2019: The Netroots Nation was held at the Pennsylvania Convention Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania by the Netroots Foundation.
July 15–17 and 19–20, 2019: The Iowa Presidential Candidate Forums were held in Des Moines, Davenport, Cedar Rapids, Sioux City, and Council Bluffs by AARP and The Des Moines Register.
July 16: This was the deadline to qualify for the second Democratic debate.
July 24: The 2020 Presidential Candidates Forum was held in Detroit, Michigan by the NAACP.
July 30: The first part of the second official debate was held in Detroit, Michigan.
July 31: The second part of the second official debate was held in Detroit, Michigan.


==== August ====
August 3: The Public Service Forum was held at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, by AFSCME and the HuffPost.
August 6: Mike Gravel dropped out of the race, endorsing both Bernie Sanders' and Tulsi Gabbard's campaigns.
August 10: The Gun Sense Forum was held in Des Moines, Iowa by Everytown for Gun Safety and Moms Demand Action.
 August 8–11, August 13, and August 17, 2019: The Des Moines Register Political Soapbox was held at the Iowa State Fair, Des Moines, Iowa by the Des Moines Register.
 August 15: John Hickenlooper dropped out of the race, later announcing a campaign for Colorado's Class 2 United States Senate seat up for election in 2020.
August 19–20, 2019: The Frank LaMere Native American Presidential Forum was held at Orpheum Theater, Sioux City, Iowa by Four Directions, Native Organizers Alliance, National Congress of American Indians, Native American Rights Fund, Coalition of Large Tribes, and Great Plains Tribal Chairmen's Association.
August 21: Jay Inslee dropped out of the race and announced a campaign for re-election as Governor of Washington in 2020.
August 23: Seth Moulton dropped out of the race and announced he would run for re-election to his seat in the House of Representatives in 2020.
August 28:
This was the deadline to qualify for the third Democratic debate.
Kirsten Gillibrand dropped out of the race.


==== September ====
September 4: A Climate Crisis Town Hall was held by CNN at New York City, New York.
September 7: The New Hampshire Democratic Party State Convention was held in Manchester, New Hampshire. 19 candidates were in attendance and addressed the delegates and voters.
September 8: The Asian American Pacific Islanders Progressive Democratic Presidential Forum was held at Orange County, California by AAPI Victory Fund and by Asian Americans Rising.
September 12: The third official debate took place in Houston, Texas at Texas Southern University, aired on ABC and Univision.
September 19–20: A Climate Forum was held in Washington, D.C. by MSNBC, Georgetown University, and Our Daily Planet.
September 20: Bill de Blasio dropped out of the race.
September 21: The Iowa People's Presidential Forum was held in Des Moines, Iowa by Iowa Citizens for Community Improvement Action Fund and People's Action.


==== October ====
October 1: This was the deadline to qualify for the fourth Democratic debate.
October 2: A Gun Safety Forum was held in Las Vegas, Nevada by Giffords and March for Our Lives.
October 10: An LGBTQ Forum was held at UCLA, in Los Angeles, California by the Human Rights Campaign and UCLA.
October 13: The New Hampshire People's Presidential Forum was held at the University of New Hampshire in Durham, New Hampshire sponsored by Rights & Democracy, New Hampshire Youth Movement, and People's Action.
October 15: The fourth official debate took place at Otterbein University in Westerville, Ohio, aired on CNN. The debate featured 12 candidates, setting a record for the highest number of candidates in one presidential debate.
October 24: Tim Ryan dropped out of the race and announced he would run for re-election to his seat in the House of Representatives in 2020.
October 26: The People's Presidential Forum was held in East Las Vegas Community Center, Las Vegas, Nevada by the Progressive Leadership Alliance of Nevada Action and People's Action.


==== November ====
November 1: Beto O'Rourke dropped out of the race.
November 8: Michael Bloomberg prepares to enter the race by getting on the ballot in Alabama.
November 13: This was the deadline to qualify for the fifth Democratic debate.
November 14: Former Governor of Massachusetts Deval Patrick entered the race.
November 16: The California Democratic Party Fall Endorsing Convention Forum was held at Long Beach Arena, Long Beach, California by the California Democratic Party/Univision.
November 17: The Nevada State Democratic Party's First In The West "cattle call" event was held.
November 19: Wayne Messam dropped out of the race.
November 20: The fifth Democratic debate took place in Atlanta, Georgia, co-hosted by MSNBC and The Washington Post.
November 21: Michael Bloomberg, former Mayor of New York City, formed an exploratory committee.
November 24: Bloomberg officially entered the race, three days after the formation of his exploratory committee.


==== December ====
December 12: This is the deadline to qualify for the sixth Democratic debate.
December 19: The sixth Democratic debate will take place in Los Angeles, California, at Loyola Marymount University.


== Primary and caucus calendar ==

The following primary and caucus dates have been scheduled by state statutes or state party decisions, but are subject to change pending legislation, state party delegate selection plans, or the decisions of state secretaries of state:
February 3: Iowa caucuses
February 11: New Hampshire primary
February 22: Nevada caucuses
February 29: South Carolina primary
March 3: Super Tuesday (Alabama, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, and Virginia primaries); American Samoa caucuses; Democrats Abroad party-run primary for expatriates features a March 3–10 voting period.
March 10: Idaho, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, and Washington primaries; North Dakota firehouse caucuses (identical to a party-run primary).
March 14: Northern Mariana Islands caucuses
March 17: Arizona, Florida, Illinois, and Ohio primaries
March 24: Georgia primary
March 29: Puerto Rico primary
April 4: Alaska, Hawaii, and Louisiana primaries; Wyoming caucuses
April 7: Wisconsin primary
April 28: Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, New York, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island primaries
May 2: Kansas primary; Guam caucuses
May 5: Indiana primary
May 12: Nebraska and West Virginia primaries
May 19: Kentucky and Oregon primaries
June 2: Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico, and South Dakota primaries
June 6: United States Virgin Islands caucuses
June 16: District of Columbia primary (bill proposing a move to June 2 has been approved by the DC Council and now only awaits final approval by the US Congress for enactment)The 57 states, districts, territories, or other constituencies with elections of pledged delegates to decide the Democratic presidential nominee, currently plan to hold the first major determining step for these elections via 50 primaries and seven caucuses (Iowa, Nevada, Wyoming, and four territories). The number of states holding caucuses decreased from 14 in the 2016 nomination process to only three in 2020.


== Ballot access ==
Filing for the primaries began in October of 2019.  means the candidate is on the ballot for the upcoming primary contest, and  means a candidate is not on the ballot. States that have not yet announced who is on the ballot are blank.


== National convention ==

The 2020 Democratic National Convention is scheduled to take place in Milwaukee, Wisconsin on July 13–16, 2020.In addition to Milwaukee, the DNC also considered bids from three other cities: Houston, Texas; Miami Beach, Florida; and Denver, Colorado. Denver, though, was immediately withdrawn from consideration by representatives for the city, who cited scheduling conflicts.


== Endorsements ==


== Campaign finance ==
This is an overview of the money being raised and spent by each campaign for the entire period running from January 1, 2017 to September 30, 2019, as it was reported to the Federal Election Commission (FEC). Total raised are the sum of all individual contributions (large and small), loans from the candidate, and transfers from other campaign committees. The last column, Cash On Hand (COH), has been calculated by subtracting the "spent" amount from the "raised" amount, thereby showing the remaining cash each campaign had available for its future spending as of September 30, 2019. In total the candidates have raised $476,284,606.


== See also ==
2020 Democratic National Convention
2020 Republican Party presidential primaries
2020 Green Party presidential primaries
2020 Libertarian Party presidential primaries


== Notes ==


== References ==