Purandar taluka

Purandar taluka (Marathi: पुरंदर तालुका), is a taluka in Bhor subdivision of Pune district of state of Maharashtra in India.List of villages in Purandar Tehsil are listed below-
Askarwadi village
Askarwadi village is in Askarwadi taluka of Pune district in state of Maharashtra. Askarwadi village distance from district place Pune is about 18 Km. Askarwadi village distance from taluka place Purandar is about 18 Km. Askarwadi village area is 418.00 hector. According to 2011 census population of Askarwadi village is 457. About 100 families lives in Askarwadi village. Total male population is 226 and female population is 231. Askarwadi village does not have post office. Pincode of village Askarwadi is 412301. Public state transport services are available in village Askarwadi. Askarwadi does not have railway station. Askarwadi is not on the national highway. Askarwadi is not on the state highway. Askarwadi is not on the district road. Askarwadi does not have commercial/nationalise banks. Askarwadi does not have co-operative banks. Askarwadi does not have agriculture credit societies. Askarwadi does not have agriculture credit societies. Askarwadi has self help groups. Askarwadi does not have daily market. Askarwadi does not have weekly market. Askarwadi does not have public library. Askarwadi does not have newspaper services.
Bandhalwadi village
Bandhalwadi village is in Bandhalwadi taluka of Pune district in state of Maharashtra. Bandhalwadi village distance from district place Pune is about 55 Km. Bandhalwadi village distance from taluka place Purandar is about 24 Km. Bandhalwadi village area is 226.00 hector. According to 2011 census population of Bandhalwadi village is 406. About 95 families lives in Bandhalwadi village. Total male population is 193 and female population is 213. Bandhalwadi village does not have post office. Public state transport services are available in village Bandhalwadi. Bandhalwadi does not have railway station. Bandhalwadi is not on the national highway. Bandhalwadi is not on the state highway. Bandhalwadi is not on the district road. Bandhalwadi does not have commercial/nationalise banks. Bandhalwadi does not have co-operative banks. Bandhalwadi does not have agriculture credit societies. Bandhalwadi does not have agriculture credit societies. Bandhalwadi does not have self help groups. Bandhalwadi does not have daily market. Bandhalwadi does not have weekly market. Bandhalwadi does not have public library. Bandhalwadi does not have newspaper services.
Belsar village
Belsar village is in Belsar taluka of Pune district in state of Maharashtra. Belsar village distance from district place Pune is about 43 Km. Belsar village distance from taluka place Purandar is about 13 Km. Belsar village area is 1747.61 hector. According to 2011 census population of Belsar village is 3741. About 832 families lives in Belsar village. Total male population is 1857 and female population is 1884. Belsar village has a post office. Pincode of village Belsar is 412303. Public state transport services are available in village Belsar. Belsar does not have railway station. Belsar is not on the national highway. Belsar is on the state highway. Belsar is on the district road. Belsar does not have commercial/nationalise banks. Belsar does not have co-operative banks. Belsar has agriculture credit societies. Belsar does not have agriculture credit societies. Belsar has self help groups. Belsar does not have daily market. Belsar has weekly market. Belsar has public library. Belsar has newspaper services.
Bhairavwadi village
Bhairavwadi village is in Bhairavwadi taluka of Pune district in state of Maharashtra. Bhairavwadi village distance from district place Pune is about 55 Km. Bhairavwadi village distance from taluka place Purandar is about 25 Km. Bhairavwadi village area is 307.70 hector. According to 2011 census population of Bhairavwadi village is 624. About 129 families lives in Bhairavwadi village. Total male population is 321 and female population is 303. Bhairavwadi village does not have post office. Public state transport services are available in village Bhairavwadi. Bhairavwadi does not have railway station. Bhairavwadi is not on the national highway. Bhairavwadi is not on the state highway. Bhairavwadi is on the district road. Bhairavwadi does not have commercial/nationalise banks. Bhairavwadi does not have co-operative banks. Bhairavwadi does not have agriculture credit societies. Bhairavwadi does not have agriculture credit societies. Bhairavwadi has self help groups. Bhairavwadi does not have daily market. Bhairavwadi does not have weekly market. Bhairavwadi does not have public library. Bhairavwadi does not have newspaper services.


== See also ==
Talukas in Pune district


== References ==