Black Racer (Marvel Comics)

Black Racer (Ariana) is a fictional character, a supervillain appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. She first appeared in Captain America #337, dated January 1988, and was created by writer Mark Gruenwald and artist Tom Morgan. The character is usually depicted as a member of the second Serpent Society. 
Black Racer, along with Copperhead, Fer-de-Lance and  Puff Adder, showed up using the name Serpent Society,  using the guise to infiltrate the real Serpent Society on behalf of Viper. Black Racer aided Viper's plans in turning the president into a reptile, allowing her to take control of the United States. The plans were foiled by Captain America and his allies, including various Serpent Society members still loyal to the original leader Sidewinder. She remained a member of the group when the Serpent Society was reorganized into "Serpent Society".


== Publication history ==
Black Racer first appeared in Captain America #337-338 (January–February 1988), and was created by Mark Gruenwald and Tom Morgan.
The character subsequently appears in Captain America #341-342 (May–June 1988), Uncanny X-Men Annual #13 (1989), Captain America #365 (December 1989), #367 (February 1990), #379 (November 1990), Quasar #17 (December 1990), Captain America #380-382 (December 1990-February 1991), and Captain America v.2 #30-31 (October–November 2004).
Black Racer appeared as part of the "Serpent Society" entry in the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe Update '89 #6.


== Fictional character biography ==
A quiet woman with super speed, Black Racer first joined the fourth Serpent Squad, robbing a casino in Las Vegas. Sidewinder took note of this, and invited the Serpent Squad to join his Serpent Society. They accepted, but were really just involved in a ploy to get Viper into the leadership position of the Society. Black Racer was among the several members to side with Viper and betray Sidewinder. She was ordered by Viper to search all the hospitals in the area for the injured former leader. However, after Viper abandoned the group, Black Racer continued to serve with the Society under leadership of Cobra. She also participated in a race between super heroes and villains with super speed. However, she disappeared for quite some time, only resurfacing recently alongside the rest of the Serpent Society as they sought to exact their revenge on Diamondback.She has been seen as member of the Serpent Society under Cobra's leadership. After the group had captured and chained Captain America and Diamondback (really an L.M.D.) in this underground New York headquarters the pair escaped. S.H.I.E.L.D. subsequently took Black Racer and the rest of the Society into custody.She has been sometimes depicted as Caucasian, and other times as African-American.As part of the "All-New, All-Different Marvel," Black Racer appears as a member of Viper's Serpent Society under its new name of Serpent Solutions. She assisted Cottonmouth and Copperhead into attacking Diamondback. When Captain America fought them to help Diamondback, he learned too late that Diamondback has joined up with Serpent Solutions where she knocks him out and brings him to Serpent Solution's base.In a prelude to the "Hunted" storyline, several members of the Serpent Society were captured by Kraven the Hunter, Taskmaster, and Black Ant and forced to participate in a murderous hunt set up by Arcade. Black Mamba, Cottonmouth, Bushmaster, Black Racer, Puff Adder, Rock Python, and Fer-de-Lance were placed in electric cages to wait for the hunt to commence.


== Powers and abilities ==
Black Racer is capable of moving at super speeds and is able to make multiple attacks.


== Other versions ==


=== Ultimate Marvel ===
In the Ultimate universe, Black Racer is a member of the gang called the Serpent Skulls. She serves as a lieutenant, and similar to her main counterpart, has super speed. During the final showdown with the All-New Ultimates, she is defeated and presumably imprisoned.


== References ==


== External links ==
Black Racer at the Appendix to the Handbook of the Marvel Universe