Space Goofs

Space Goofs (French title: Les Zinzins de l'Espace) is a French animated series that was produced by Gaumont Multimedia for its first season, and Xilam Animation for its second season, for France 3 and broadcast on that network from September 6, 1997 to May 12, 2006. It also debuted in the same year in Germany on ProSieben, and aired in Quebec on Télétoon. In the UK, the first season premiered on Channel 4 in 1998 under the show's original title of Home to Rent in the United Kingdom and the second season premiered under the series' final name on Nicktoons UK on November 5, 2005 at 9:30am. Furthermore, it aired as part of the Fox Kids lineup on Fox in the United States. 
The series also served as the basis of a adventure game, developed by Xilam themselves and published by Ubi Soft Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, Sega Dreamcast, and Mac OS called Stupid Invaders in 2000, which was dedicated to its creator, Jean-Yves Raimbaud (1958–1998). It featured the voice actors of its English dub as the five aliens, along with Rob Paulsen and Laraine Newman as various other characters, and was more adult than the series, so it was rated "T" by the ESRB and "11+" by the ELSPA.


== Plot ==
Five extraterrestrials from the fictitious planet Zigma B, Candy H. Caramella, Etno Polino, Stereo Monovici, Bud Budiovitch and Gorgious Klatoo go on a picnic together in space. However, their spaceship crashes into an asteroid, and they fall to planet Earth. They realize that if any human finds out that they are aliens, they could be captured and experimented on by scientists, so they take shelter in the attic of a house that is up for rent. The aliens have two goals: return to their home planet, and chase away anybody who tries to establish themselves in the house. To remain unknown from humans, the aliens use a device called the SMTV that lets them transform into almost any entity of their choosing, but always cycles through three other transformations when used.


== Characters ==
Candy Hector Caramella: Small and green with a wrinkled forehead and wearing a polka-dotted apron, Candy is the uptight neat freak of the group. He is also homosexual (one of the first such characters in a non-American cartoon), and it is not uncommon to see him flirt with men. In the Latin American Spanish dub that was aired on Jetix and Magic Kids, Candy's gender was changed to female (despite his middle name). In both the original French dub and the English dub, Candy's voice parodies a fancy English accent, and was done by Eric Le Roch in Season 1 of the French dub, Éric Métayer in Season 2 of the French dub, and Charlie Adler (Ed and Bev Bighead from Rocko's Modern Life, Ickis from Aaahh!!!, and the title characters from Cow and Chicken) in the English dub.
Etno Polino: Being short and purple with red lips and a big nose, Etno is the leader and brains of the group. A scientific genius, he creates all sorts of machines with the intention of aiding the group's return to their own planet, including rockets. The aliens often fail to blast off into space, either due to Etno's rockets malfunctioning or someone else boarding the ships. In the original French dub, he speaks with an English accent, but in the English dub, he has a rather fast-paced scientist speech, vaguely reminiscent of those found in educational films about space exploration from the 1950s. Etno's voice was provided by Peter Hudson in Season 1 of the French dub, Bernard Alane in Season 2 of the French dub, and Maurice LaMarche ("Big" Bob Pataki from Hey Arnold!) in the English dub.
Stereo Monovici: Two-headed and red in which each head has a slightly long nose, Stereo acts as two people since each head has its own mind. They are the "bookworm" of the group yet often waste their intelligence on the most useless information. Both heads often argue with each other. Stereo was removed from the series for Season 2, but reappeared in two segments of that season ("Other World Champs" and "UFO"). Both heads are voiced by Antoine Tomé in Season 1 of the French dub, Patrick Guillemin in Season 2 of the French dub, and Jeff Bennett in Season 1 of the English dub (but for Season 2 of the English dub, they are voiced by Charlie Adler and Danny Mann respectively). One of the heads also speaks with a distinct high-pitched tone, while the other head speaks with a rather low-pitched one.
Bud Budiovitch: Tall and orange with three strands of hair, a long neck, and big pink bloodshot eyes, Bud is lazy and naive. He is a television addict and spends most of the time sitting in front of it and drinking soft drinks. Like Etno, Bud is always the last one to panic in a situation. He always comes up with the best solution, but most of the time no one will listen to him. Bud's voice was provided by Marc Bretonnière in the French dub, Jeff Bennett in Season 1 of the English dub, and Louis Garneau in Season 2 of the English dub, and has a strong hillbilly impression. He is also based on Ren Höek of The Ren & Stimpy Show.
Gorgious Klatoo: Fat and blue with a heavy chin and a protruding bottom tooth, Gorgious is the grumpy and brutal one of the group. He is very greedy and his hobbies consist of bullying the other aliens and eating. Gorgious' voice was done by Patrick Préjean in the French dub, Michael Sicoly in early episodes of the English dub, and Danny Mann in all subsequent episodes of the English dub, taking from Northeastern US (New York or Boston) accent. His surname is likely a reference to Klaatu.


== Episodes ==


=== Series overview ===


=== Season 1 (1997–1998) ===


=== Season 2 (2005–2006) ===


== Reception ==
The series was a hit in its home country of France, in particular due to its absurd, slapstick, and tongue-in-cheek slightly politically incorrect humor. It also enjoyed reasonable success in both the US and UK at the time.


== Stupid Invaders ==

An adventure game based on Space Goofs named Stupid Invaders was released in 2000–2001 by Ubi Soft. The plot centers around the aliens and their attempts to return to space. All the main characters of the series are playable through the course of the game. The game is notable for deliberately rejecting or distorting some cliched aspects of the adventure genre, as standard adventure game tactics such as picking up, talking to, or interacting with anything encountered can often result in instant (albeit highly comical) death for the player's currently-controlled character and the need to reload, for example, often without warning. The game's writing also takes a more risque approach to its humor than the TV series, resulting in a "T" rating from the ESRB and an "11+" rating from the ELSPA.
Stupid Invaders was developed by Xilam Animation themselves for Windows and Mac OS, and later ported to the Sega Dreamcast (by Titanium Studios).[1]


=== Reception ===
The game received "mixed" reviews on all three systems, according to the review aggregation website Metacritic.


== Appearances in other Xilam series ==
In Shuriken School: The Ninja's Secret, a picture of Candy is on the cover of Jimmy B.'s manga, Star Attacks. The characters also made a cameo in the Oggy and the Cockroaches episode "Night Watchmen" (the eponymous main characters for that series also made their first appearance in this one's third episode, "Venus Junior", when the aliens were watching their television), and in the Les Dalton episode "Le Secret Passage", when Candy was one of Joe's transformations in Fort Dalton.


== References ==


== External links ==
(in French) Official website
Stupid Invaders official website
Space Goofs on IMDb
Space Goofs at TV.com
Stupid Invaders at MobyGames