Diablo Valley College

Diablo Valley College (DVC) is a community college with campuses in Pleasant Hill and San Ramon in Contra Costa County, California.DVC is one of three publicly supported two-year community colleges in the Contra Costa Community College District (along with Contra Costa College and Los Medanos College), and was opened in 1949. Current enrollment is more than 22,000 students, and DVC has 300 full-time and 370 part-time instructors.


== Academics ==
DVC is a “feeder” college to the University of California, Berkeley; California State University, East Bay; and to St. Mary’s College. DVC ranks among the top five transfer colleges in California. In 2004, the top four transfer destinations were California State University, East Bay, San Francisco State University, UC Berkeley and UC Davis.
DVC also offers a variety of occupational specialties, including hotel/restaurant management, culinary arts, dental technology and real estate. DVC has a very active speech and debating team.


== Sports ==
Several sports are offered at Diablo Valley College including: men's and women's basketball, cross country, swimming and diving, tennis and water polo. Other sports include: baseball, football, lacrosse, track and field (men) and soccer, softball, volleyball (women).
DVC has had famous athletes throughout its sports history, probably most recognized being Willie McGee, a former MLB National League MVP who played for the DVC baseball team in 1977. Another notable baseball alumni is Doug Davis, who pitched in Major League Baseball from 1999-2011.
Demarshay Johnson, a former DVC basketball star who went on to play for the University of Nevada, was named CCCAA 1st team All-State after the 2004-05 season. That season he led the CCCAA in blocks, averaging 5.2 per game and was named Bay Valley Conference MVP.
The DVC Viking men's lacrosse program was the first junior college club in California, forming in 2008. In 2013 DVC were crowned champion of the California Junior College Lacrosse Association (CJCLA).


== History ==
Diablo Valley College was founded in 1949 as East Contra Costa Junior College. The college currently enrolls over 22,000 students on two sites.


=== Grade-fixing scandal ===
In 2007, a six-year grade fixing scheme came to light with allegations that over 70 students used sex or cash as payment to student employees in the admissions and records office in exchange for over 400 grade changes. Many of these students have transferred to universities and in some cases may have already graduated. By November 2007, 49 students had been charged with misdemeanors or felonies over the incident, and at least one had accepted a no contest plea. A spokesperson for the Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges said that although the scandal was a negative factor it would be unlikely to lead to the school's loss of accreditation.In the first trial resulting from the grade changes, former student employee Erick Martinez was acquitted of all criminal charges on September 5, 2008. Jurors reached that decision after concluding that prosecutors failed to prove beyond a reasonable double that there was a definite link between Martinez and grade changes.


== College newspaper ==
The Inquirer, the college's student-run newspaper, is produced on campus by the Journalism 126 class.
The newspaper was forced to produce its paper off-site at the Contra Costa Times newsroom when a bomb-threat on October 24, 2006 closed the campus and access to the newsroom was restricted.The Inquirer won General Excellence awards from the Journalism Association of Community Colleges in 2006, 2010, 2011 and 2012. The newspaper also won a Pacesetter award from JACC in 1999.


== Sponsors ==
The student union at DVC is named for Margaret Lesher, widow of Dean Lesher, founder of the Contra Costa Times and cofounder of the Margaret and Dean Lesher Foundation.


== Notable alumni ==
In addition to the athletes named above, notable alumni of Diablo Valley include:

Lauren Beck, film producer
Kyle Gass, member of Tenacious D
John Gesek, former NFL player
Dennis Havrilla, former IFL player
Eva Marie, Model and WWE diva
Willie McGee, former Major League Baseball outfielder for the St. Louis Cardinals, Oakland Athletics, San Francisco Giants, and Boston Red Sox and 1985 National League MVP
George Miller, former U.S. Congressman
Ron Turner, former NFL coach
Matt Overton, Jacksonville Jaguars long snapper
Katharine Ross, actress
Robert Scott, true crime author
Julie Strain, model and actress
De'Ondre Wesley, former NFL player
Timothy P. White, the former chancellor of the University of California, Riverside and seventh chancellor of the California State University system.
Greg Wilson, former CFL player


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website