Deputy Vice-Chancellor

Deputy to the Federal Chancellor (German: Stellvertreter des Bundeskanzlers) is a title of one of the German cabinet members. The Chancellor is the head of government and, according to the constitution, gives this title to one of the Federal Ministers. This minister can use the constitutional powers of the Chancellor when officially replacing the Chancellor. This has never happened up to now, although, according to the internal regulations of the government, the Deputy chairs cabinet meetings when the Chancellor is absent.
A German Deputy of the Chancellor can be regarded as the equivalent of a deputy prime minister in other parliamentary systems. A very important difference to e.g. the Vice President of the USA is that the Deputy is not the automatic successor of a Chancellor suddenly leaving office. The Deputy is thought only as a replacement for the actual Chancellor. Should the Chancellor for example die, the Federal President appoints one of the cabinet members acting Chancellor until the parliament elects a new Chancellor. When in 1974 Chancellor Brandt resigned, the Federal President asked indeed Deputy Scheel to perform the duties of the Chancellor.
Usually, a German government is based on a coalition of two or more parties. The Chancellor makes gives the title to a minister of the (largest) coalition partner. In practice it is an honorary title denoting the most important cabinet member of the coalition partner. The 18th and current Deputy of the Chancellor is Olaf Scholz (SPD). He was appointed by Chancellor Angela Merkel (CDU) to the position on 14 March 2018 and also serves as the Federal Minister of Finance.
Although German: Stellvertreter is the constitutional term, most Germans know the Deputy by the expression Vice Chancellor (German: Vizekanzler). Chancellor (German: Kanzler) is the traditional term for the German head of government since 1867/71. A general deputy has been introduced only in 1878 by law (German: Stellvertretungsgesetz). In the Weimar Republic of 1919-1933, the 
office of German: Vizekanzler was mentioned in the internal reglement of the government. The current office or title exists since the constitution of 1949.


== Office ==
The German cabinet consists of the Federal Chancellor and the Federal Ministers. According to the Basic Law (Constitution), the Chancellor appoints one of the  ministers Vice Chancellor. Theoretically it is possible that the Chancellor appoints several Deputies. The Chancellor can also take the position away. This is different to the appointment of a Federal Minister as such: the Chancellor makes a proposal to the Federal President and then the Federal President makes the official appointment.
Since coalition governments are common in German politics, the Vice Chancellor is in most cases a minister of the junior coalition partner, often the respective party leader.
In case of the Chancellor's absence, the Vice Chancellor acts in his or her place, for instance by heading Cabinet meetings.
The Vice Chancellor will not automatically become Chancellor for the rest of the term if the Chancellor dies or becomes unable to fulfill his or her duties in any other way. It is the President who asks the Vice Chancellor to fulfill the Chancellor's duties until the Bundestag elects a new Chancellor. This has happened only once: Vice Chancellor Walter Scheel was acting Chancellor for nine days in May 1974 between Chancellor Willy Brandt’s resignation and Helmut Schmidt’s election.


== History ==
The office was initially established by the 1878 Stellvertretungsgesetz (Deputation Act), which provided for the Imperial Chancellor appointing a deputy, officially known as Allgemeiner Stellvertreter des Reichskanzlers (General Deputy to the Imperial Chancellor). In addition to the general deputy, who would be responsible for all the affairs of the Chancellor, the Chancellor could appoint deputies with limited responsibilities. The act was revised on 28 October 1918, when the possibility of appointing deputies with limited responsibilities was removed and the Vice-Chancellor was given the right to appear before parliament.In the Weimar Republic, the office was considered less important and was usually held by the minister of justice or interior. The most known office holder is Franz von Papen, a former Chancellor who formed a coalition government of national socialists and conservatives. Chancellor became Adolf Hitler, and Papen Vice Chancellor. It became soonly obvious that the position of Vice Chancellor provided no powers and was unsuited to constrain Hitler.
In the Federal Republic (since 1949), the Chancellors had no interest in allowing the Deputy to use the title for self promotion. Since 1966 it became customary that the coalition partner of the governing party received the ministry of the exterior who was also appointed Deputy. The ministry of the exterior was considered to be the most important cabinet post besides the Chancellorship. This tradition faded away in the time of Merkel's office, partially, because political heavyweights of the coalition partner chose a different ministry for personal preference.


== Lists of Vice Chancellors ==


=== German Empire (Allgemeiner Stellvertreter des Reichskanzlers) ===
Political Party:
  FKP
  FVP


=== Weimar Republic (Allgemeiner Stellvertreter des Reichskanzlers) ===
Political Party:
  DDP
  Centre
  DVP
  SPD
  DNVP


=== Nazi Germany ===
Political Party:
  NSDAP


=== Federal Republic of Germany ===
Political Party:
  FDP
  CDU
  SPD
  Green


== References ==