Vishwakarma Institute of Technology

Vishwakarma Institute of Technology (VIT, Marathi : विश्वकर्मा अभियांत्रिकी महाविद्यालय, पुणे ) is an autonomous engineering college located in Upper Indira Nagar, Bibwewadi, Pune, Maharashtra, India. The institute was established in 1983 and it is affiliated to the Savitribai Phule Pune University. The college has NAAC and NBA accreditation(A++).
The college is largely supported by the Bansilal Ramanath Agarwal Charitable Trust. VIT was the first private college in Maharashtra to attain academic autonomy in the academic year 2008-2009. This helped the college to introduce cross-departmental and industry-oriented subjects in the curriculum. The college is the only college in Pune to provide Honors and Minors courses in addition to normal undergraduate courses.


== Courses ==


=== Undergraduate ===
The course length of all Bachelors of Engineering/Technology (B.E. or B.Tech) lasts four years. Courses include:

Chemical Engineering
Computer Engineering
Electronics Engineering
Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering
Industrial Engineering
Information Technology
Instrumentation Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Production EngineeringCurrently, the following departments do not offer full-fledged courses of their own:

Civil Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Engineering Sciences & Humanities
Workshop


=== Graduate ===
The following are the postgraduate programs:

Masters in Computer Applications (M.C.A.)
Masters of Technology (M.Tech.)
Electronics and telecommunication
Mechanical (Heat Power & Design Engineering)
Computer Science and Engineering
Industrial Engineering
Instrumentation & Control (Process Instrumentation)


=== Honors & Minors (Undergraduate) ===
Honors in Aerospace Engineering
Honors in Artificial Intelligence and Data Analytics
Honors in Automobile Engineering
Honors in Chemical Engineering
Honors in Embedded System and Design
Honors in Environmental Technology and Biotechnology
Honors in Industrial
Honors in Instrumentation and Control
Honors in Networks
Honors in Signal Processing in Communication
Honors in VLSI Design
Minor in Computer Engineering
Minor in Industrial Management


=== Doctoral ===
A doctoral degree is awarded in the following fields:

Chemical Engineering
Computer Engineering
Electronics Engineering
Instrumentation Engineering
Industrial Engineering
Mechanical EngineeringThe college has a Department of Self Development (DoSD) that handles campus placements.


== Campus ==
The college has approximately 2,900 students, 225 faculty members, 67 laboratories, one central library, and 150 administrative and supportive staff.
The campus is spread over an area of 7 acres (28,000 m2) and consists of four major buildings, a cafeteria, a coffee store, a fruit juice stand, a breakfast center, NPB, and a fully air-conditioned auditorium with ceiling fans.
The students' hostel is off-campus. It is state-of-the-art and is equipped with a dining facility. It is located about 3.5 km from the main campus.


== Global Alliances/International-liaisons ==
Student Exchange Program with Groupe des Ecoles des Mines (GEM), France.GEM and VIT have a Memorandum of Understanding allowing a student exchange program, which offers students studying in seven GEM affiliated schools in France to send their students to VIT. Conversely, and students in the third year of their bachelor's degree at VIT can also go to France for one semester. The first batch completed its studies abroad during Jan-May 2009. The association encourages higher learning (postgraduate learning) in GEM schools across France.

Student Exchange Program with colleges in Ontario-Maharashtra-Goa (OMG).Under this program, students at VIT are sent to various partner colleges in the state of Ontario, Canada, while Canadian students come to partner colleges in Maharashtra and Goa. Students in the third year of their bachelor's degree at VIT are sent to Canada for one semester. The first batch completed its studies abroad from August–December 2009.


== Campus events ==
The college organizes state, national, and international conferences and events.
Notable events include the following:

MélangeThe annual event is a mixture of cultural, technical, and sporting competitions where students from diverse colleges across India come to participate.

VishwakarandakThe annual event is the flagship cultural event on the campus. The participants are restricted to students of VIT and the competitions are held between the departments. The college publishes its own newsletter called Wink.

Entrepreneurship Development CentreThe Entrepreneurship Development Centre (EDC) has a vision of producing successful entrepreneurs imbibed with leadership qualities using innovative and ethical business practices to make a global impact. It was founded in September 2013 and has been successful in organizing various sessions involving eminent personalities.


== Clubs & Societies ==
IEEE Student Branch                                   IEEE which is the largest technical and research society in the world, has got its largest IEEE student branch in VIT, with a whooping 250+ active members in the year 2019. It conducts a wide range of workshops and seminars on the latest cutting edge technologies.
Google Developer Students Club              This club is affiliated to Google and conducts workshops and seminars on Android App development, Web development, etc.
Mercantile Club
Mercantile, the economics and finance club, is a student-driven and faculty-guided initiative for enthusiasts in the field of finance and economics. The objective of the club is to help students appreciate the role of economics and finance by linking the learning in the classroom to real life business news and problems. The club achieves its objectives by conducting various events which includes case study analysis, eco-fin quiz, crosswords, guest lectures, workshops, and virtual stock trading competition.

Mirage Campus Film SocietyMirage Campus Film Society was formed in VIT College in November 2009. VIT became the first college in Pune University to be affiliated to a film society from the Federation of Film Societies of India (FFSI). This is an idea by the college to cultivate the taste of good cinema among the students. The basic objective of Mirage is to let students know that cinema is not only a form of entertainment but it is an art form as well as a medium of communication.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website