Vellore Institute of Technology

Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT) is a private higher education institute deemed to be university, located in Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India. Founded in 1984, as Vellore Engineering College, by G. Viswanathan, the institution offers 20 undergraduate, 34 postgraduate, four integrated and four research programs. It has campuses in Vellore, Chennai, Bhopal and Amaravati.


== Admissions ==
VIT admits students through its own engineering entrance exam, called the Vellore Institute of Technology Engineering Entrance Examination (VITEEE). It is conducted every year in the month of April and May.  The exam has been conducted online since 2013 and in 2018, 212,000 students have registered.


== Academics ==
VIT offers academic programs in Engineering, Technology, Applied Sciences, and Management. It offers 54 undergraduate programs, 32 postgraduate, 9 Integrated Programmes, 2 Research Programmes and 2 M.Tech Industrial Programmes. In addition to full-time Ph.D Degrees in Engineering and Management Disciplines, Ph.D. in Science and Languages and Integrated Ph.D. programmes in engineering disciplines. Research Centers, integral of respective schools encourage inter-departmental collaborative participation of students in exciting research projects. A student admitted should register in one of the schools depending on the degree/ programme selected to pursue.VIT consolidated its disciplines into 15 Schools of Study with the addition of the VIT Law School at its Chennai campus.Research centers are part of the schools to encourage collaboration between the research and coursework areas and provide an opportunity for coursework students to participate in research projects. VIT organizes industrial workshops like Automotive Engineering, organized by ParaMek Technologies in GraVitas Fest.VIT is among the first in India to implement the Fully Flexible Credit System (FFCS) which gives the students flexibility to make their own time tables by choosing the subjects and the faculties under whose guidance they want to study.


== Schools ==
Teaching at VIT is structured around schools listed below. Students are registered in one of these schools according to their field of study.

School of Advanced Sciences (SAS)
School of Architecture (V-SPARC)
VIT School of Design (V-SIGN)
School of Bio Sciences & Technology (SBST)
School of Chemical Engineering (SCHEME)
School of Civil Engineering (SCE)
School of Computer Science and Engineering (SCOPE)
School of Computer Sciences and Engineering (SCSE)
School of Electrical Engineering (SELECT)
School of Electronics Engineering (SENSE)
School of Information Technology & Engineering (SITE)
School of Mechanical Engineering (SMEC)
School of Social Sciences & Languages (SSL)
Department of Physical Education (DPE)
VIT Business School (VIT-BS)
VIT Law School (at Chennai Campus only)
VIT School of Fashion (both in Chennai and Vellore campus)
School of Hotel & Tourism Management (HOT)
VIT School of Agricultural Innovations And Advanced Learning. (VAIAL)


== College fests ==
There are two main college fests that are conducted in VIT. The Fall semester hosts the technical fests in each of the established campuses around the month of August/September. The Vellore campus organizes GRAVITAS, while the Chennai counterpart organizes TechnoVIT.
Meanwhile the Spring semesters is reserved for the cultural fest of Riviera and VIBRANCE, which are mainly sports and cultural fests. According to organizers for Riviera 2011, it pulled more than 300 participants from over 20 colleges and universities. Rivera 2013 saw popular names like Shankar-Ehsaan-Loy, Sukhwinder Singh, Chiyaan Vikram, Siddarth, singer Kartik and many more. ParaMek Technologies from New Delhi conducted a workshop on Automotive Engineering during the fest which was attended by more than 450 students.


== Campuses ==
VIT has two campuses, in Vellore and Chennai. Two former campuses of the university, in Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh and  Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh are now autonomous private universities, VIT University Amaravati and VIT University Bhopal, respectively.


=== Vellore campus ===
VIT's main campus in Vellore is on 372 acres of land. It is divided by the Chennai–Bangalore railway line. The academic portion of the campus and the women's hostels are to the south of the railway tracks while the northern portion houses the men's hostels and the outdoor stadium. The parts are connected by three subways.


=== Chennai campus ===
VIT university also has a campus in the city of Chennai, spread out over 185 acres, situated on the Vandalur-Kelambakkam road.


== Rankings ==
VIT was ranked 801-1000 in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings of 2019 and 251-300 in Asia. The QS World University Rankings ranked it 281-290 in Asia in 2019.The National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) ranked VIT 32 overall in India in 2019 and 19 among universities.Among engineering colleges in India, VIT was ranked 18 by NIRF in 2019 and 13 by Outlook India. The Week ranked it 22 in 2018 and India Today ranked VIT 3rd among private engineering colleges in the same year.The VIT Business School was ranked 46 among management schools in India by NIRF in 2019 and 51 by Outlook India's "Top 100 Management Schools" of 2017.


== Notable alumni ==
Papias Malimba Musafiri
Bindu Madhavi


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website