Crashbox

Crashbox is a Canadian-American educational children's television show that airs on the HBO Family digital cable television channel in the United States and Asia and ran from 1999 to 2000. It aims to educate grade-school children in history, math, vocabulary, and other various subjects.
Crashbox was one of the cornerstone programs for the relaunch of the HBO Family channel in January 1999. The series has never been released on DVD or VHS, but reruns air on HBO Family to this day.


== Creation team ==
Crashbox was created by Planet Grande Pictures (consisting of Eamon Harrington and John Watkin) and is animated by Cuppa Coffee Studios, headed by Adam Shaheen. Planet Grande Pictures engaged award-winning Cuppa Coffee Studios 7 months to complete 13 hours of programming.


== Plot ==
The show takes place in the insides of a game computer where green game cartridges (which are sculpted out of clay) are created and loaded by rusty robots. Each half-hour episode consists of at least seven 2-to-5-minute educational games.


== Games ==
The following games appear in this show:

Distraction News - A cardboard cutout newswoman named Dora Smarmy (voiced by Mari Weiss) will tell the viewers about certain things as the viewers watch to learn about them while not getting distracted of the things that appear during the broadcast.
Sketch Pad - A beatnik (voiced by Greg Eagles) will draw pictures of some things as the viewers must solve the reason of certain things happening.
Psycho Math - Professor Rocket (voiced by Arif S. Kinchen) gives the viewers long math problems for them to solve with countable pictures.
Ear We Are - A right ear (voiced by John Watkin) and a left ear (voiced by Alan Schlaifer) help viewers identify different sounds to let people know where they are.
Haunted House Party - A haunted house is the setting of a house party hosted by an unseen Horrid One (voiced by John Watkin) that ghosts attend as the viewer must identify the historical "ghost of honor" by listening to clues about them. When all the clues have been said, the Horrid One will recap them to the viewers before the historical figure is revealed in cardboard cutout form.
Eddie Bull - Eddie Bull (voiced by Ritchie Montgomery) gives viewers three hints at what animal at the Walla Walla Washington Zoo ate him. Once the animal is identified, Eddie will be regurgitated.
10 Seconds - The game's announcer (voiced by Alan Schlaifer) gives the viewers 10 seconds to guess what the word in question is doing.
Radio Scramble - An anthropomorphic microphone named DJ Jumpin' Johnny Jumble (voiced by Peter Lurie impersonating Wolfman Jack) has the viewers unscramble a word that is the title of the song that he plays at the KBOX radio station.
Captain Bones - A pirate skeleton named Captain Bones (voiced by S. Scott Bullock) has the viewers solve math problems and other types of puzzles by having his bones form the numbers or objects and having the viewers move one of his bones to pull it off.
Poop or Scoop - The game's announcer (voiced by Danny Wells) gives facts about animals where they must guess if they are true or false.
Revolting Slob - A puppet sketch where a polite female narrator (voiced by Edie McClurg) uses the Revolting Slob (performed by Tom Vandenberg and Johan Vandergun, voiced by Michael McShane) where she gives a three-choice answer to a question that describes what the Revolting Slob is doing. The sketch ends with the other word of the final question having the Revolting Slob explode with the female narrator quoting "No slobs were harmed in the making of this show."
Wordshake - A live-action French chef (voiced by John Watkin) in a silent movie setting cooks up two words that can be used by the viewers to form one word like the words drag and in to form "dragon" and the words disturb and honey to make "Easter Bunny." The sketch usually ends with the kitchen exploding with flour.
Mug Shots - Detective Verity (voiced by Maggie Baird) has the viewers look at the interrogated testimony from the photographed suspects of a crime where they must find out who is telling the truth and which of the other three are lying as they each state where they were when the crime was happening. Each of the suspects are shown in live action. When the innocent one is identified, Verity will arrange for the guilty party to be locked up.
Like Totally Paige & Sage - An unseen valley girl (voiced by Dawn Maxey) walks the viewers through the pictures of identical twins Paige and Sage where they must spot the differences in the pictures.
Think Tank - Inside a fish tank, a Jamaican submarine captain named Captain Bob (voiced by Greg Eagles) has the viewers figure out what each of the three things that appear has in common.
Dirty Pictures - In a museum that is closed for cleaning, a maid dusts off a picture with the elderly security guard holding up cards that give the hints of the person in the picture. This is a non-speaking segment.
Lens McCracken - An ace photo snoop named Lens McCracken (voiced by S. Scott Bullock) develops pictures from a case he is working on in a puzzled way that the viewers must solve which would also be solved by his dark room's computer called the Solutionator.
Riddlesnake - An unseen Raj (voiced by Veena Bidasha) reads the riddles from the Riddlesnake that the viewers must solve.Near the end, the robots will do "Crashbox Rewind" where they review most of the games to the viewers.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 ===


=== Season 2 ===


== Cast ==
Carlos Alazraqui - Harry Houdini, Benjamin Franklin, Richard Nixon, Christopher Columbus, Thomas Edison
Maggie Baird - Detective Verity, Woman in Haunted House Party, Eleanor Roosevelt
Dee Bradley Baker - Thomas Jefferson, Henry Ford
Veena Bidasha - Riddlesnake Raj, Cleopatra
S. Scott Bullock - Captain Bones, Lens McCracken, Julius Caesar, Leonard da Vinci, Sir Isaac Newton, George Washington
Greg Eagles - Captain Bob, Sketch Pad, Jackie Robinson, Sammy Six Toes, Bass Henderson, Danger Jones
Arif S. Kinchen - Professor Rocket
Peter Lurie - Jumpin' Johnny Jumble, Green Robot, Noah
Dawn Maxey - Valley Girl Voice in Like Totally Paige and Sage
Edie McClurg - Female Polite Voice in Revolting Slob
Mike McShane - The Revolting Slob
Ritchie Montgomery - Eddie Bull
Alan Schlaifer - Ten Seconds Announcer, Butler in Haunted House Party, Ghost in Haunted House Party, Left Ear
John Watkin - Horrid One, Right Ear, Wordshake Chef, Paul Revere, William Shakespeare, Abraham Lincoln, Albert Einstein
Mari Weiss - Dora Smarmy
Danny Wells - Poop or Scoop Announcer


== References ==


== External links ==
Crashbox at TV.com
Crashbox and Cuppa Coffee article in TAKE ONE
Crashbox on IMDb