Bukit Beruang, Brunei

Bukit Beruang is a populated place in Tutong District, Brunei. It is officially a village subdivision under Telisai, a mukim (subdistrict) in the district. Bukit Beruang is primarily a public housing estate of the National Housing Scheme, a government housing programme.


== Name ==
As village subdivision, Bukit Beruang is officially known in Malay as Kampung Bukit Beruang (Kampung is sometimes spelt as Kampong), which literally means 'Bukit Beruang Village'. However, the public housing area is also known as Bukit Beruang National Housing Scheme (Malay: Rancangan Perumahan Negara Bukit Beruang), which is named after the housing programme of the estate. The housing area is also sometimes known as Perpindahan Bukit Beruang.


== Administration ==
Bukit Beruang is officially governed as a village (Malay: kampung), the third- and lowest-level administrative division of Brunei; it is one of the villages under the mukim of Telisai. The community of Bukit Beruang is administered under a village head (Malay: ketua kampung) and the incumbent is Ahmad bin Aman.Unlike other village subdivisions which generally correspond equally to postcode areas, Bukit Beruang is designated into two postcode areas, thus having two postcodes: TC3145 is the postcode for the original Bukit Beruang settlement, which is located along Jalan Bukit Beruang, where as TC3345 corresponds to the public housing area. The postcode areas were also village subdivisions but the latter have since been merged and is now administered as one subdivision.


== Education ==
Bukit Beruang is home to Tutong Sixth Form Centre, the only sixth form college in the district. It is also home to Sayyidina 'Othman Secondary School, which provides secondary education for the residents of Bukit Beruang as well as the settlements in Telisai.
Primary education is available for the resident pupils of Bukit Beruang and provided in two government primary schools, namely Pengiran Kesuma Negara Bukit Beruang Primary School and Perpindahan Kampong Bukit Beruang II Primary School. The former also shares grounds with the Religious School of the namesake, which provides the Ugama or Islamic religious primary education; it is compulsory for Muslim pupils in the country.


== Infrastructure ==


=== Housing ===
Almost all of the houses in Bukit Beruang have been built as part of the public housing estate under the National Housing Scheme (Malay: Rancangan Perumahan Negara or RPN), a government housing programme for the citizens of Brunei. The Bukit Beruang National Housing Scheme has an area of 49 hectares (120 acres) and as of 2018 consist of 530 detached houses, 1,368 units of terraces, and 368 'cluster' houses of 4-units each. It is one of the two public housing estates in the district; the other one is Telisai Landless Indigenous Citizens' Housing Scheme.


=== Miscellaneous ===
Dewan Kemasyarakatan Bukit Beruang provides the venue for social and communal events for the residents of Bukit Beruang as well as the rest of Telisai subdistrict.
Rancangan Perumahan Negara Bukit Beruang Mosque is the mosque in Bukit Beruang which serves the need for its Muslim residents for congregational prayers, in particular the weekly Friday prayers.
There is a fire station in Bukit Beruang. Bukit Beruang Fire and Rescue Station was inaugurated in 2014 and is one of three fire stations in the district, the other two located in Tutong and Lamunin.The Tutong branch of the Housing Development Department, the government department which manages the public housing, is also located in Bukit Beruang.


== See also ==
List of public housing estates in Brunei


== References ==