The Leon M. Goldstein High School for the Sciences

The Leon M. Goldstein High School for the Sciences at Kingsborough Community College, CUNY, formerly Kingsborough High School for the Sciences at Kingsborough Community College, CUNY from 1993 to 1999 is a four-year high school (grades 9-12), located in Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn, New York. Leon M. Goldstein High School is screened-admission public school under the administration of the New York City Department of Education.
LMGHS was opened in September 1993 by Mayor David Dinkins and Leon M. Goldstein, who fostered the idea for the school and was President of Kingsborough Community College, CUNY for 28 years; the high school was later renamed in Goldstein's honor. LMG is located on the northern part of the campus of Kingsborough Community College of the City University of New York; it overlooks Sheepshead Bay, Jamaica Bay, Rockaway Inlet, and the Atlantic Ocean. The high school's first class graduated in June 1997. The school is housed in a building designed for LMG, built by the NYC Department of Education, and opened in September 2002.
Goldstein has collaborative partnerships with Kingsborough Community College, and is able to use many of its facilities, i.e., the theaters in the Performing Arts Center (PAC) and Marine Arts Center (MAC), the college library, the KCC Art Gallery, the gymnasium, the waterfront, etc.  Leon M. Goldstein HS offers College Now and the Bridge Program as a result of the partnership with KCC; these programs allow high school students to take college courses and earn college credits from CUNY.

LMGHS was rated one of the best public high schools in New York City by New York Magazine and #191 out of over 1600 high schools nationwide by Newsweek Magazine.  A combination of State exam scores and other factors is used to select students.


== Demographics ==
The school's racial makeup is 68% White (non-Hispanic), 12% African American, 10% Hispanic/Latino, and 10% Asian.


== Requirements for graduation ==
In order to qualify for a diploma, students must complete four years of English, science, social studies, mathematics, physical education, and elective classes; a total of 44 credits are required for graduation. In addition, students are required to complete at least one year of foreign language; one credit each of music and art are also required.A New York State Regents Diploma is given to students who pass the Regents Examinations in English, global history, American history, algebra, geometry, advanced algebra, trigonometry, biology, chemistry, and physics and who complete three years of a foreign language. Students who have completed a minimum of nine semesters (9 credits) of arts study, along with a rigorous assessment of their art form, including passing the visual arts or music Regents Examination, will also earn the NYC Chancellor’s Arts Endorsed Diploma.


== Technology ==
Computer labs are equipped with iMacs and there is at least one computer in every classroom (typically a Dell, running windows). All classrooms in Goldstein are also equipped with Promethean Smart Boards. Teachers in Goldstein use the school's website to post homework, but also use other websites such as blogs for posting homework and other assignments. LMG also offers to all students the opportunity to join a completely student run technology service organization and programming club [10] which assist school administration and staff in maintaining/repairing computer equipment; students, in addition, regularly aid in the maintenance of school information systems and other IT infrastructure. In 2015, LMGHS computer science students were given the opportunity to partner with Young and Rubicam in a joint technology venture to expose students to a business setting and allow them to apply their knowledge of computer science/digital graphics design [11].


== AP courses ==
Leon M. Goldstein High School allows students to take a variety of Advanced Placement classes. The AP classes that are currently taught at LMG are AP Chemistry, AP Computer Science A, AP Computer Science Principles, AP Art History, AP Music Theory, AP Physics 1, AP Physics 2, AP English Language and Composition, AP English Literature and Composition, AP Spanish Language, AP Psychology, AP World History, AP Human Geography, AP United States History, AP Biology, AP Microeconomics, AP Macroeconomics, AP United States Government, AP Calculus AB, AP Calculus BC, and AP Statistics. Students in the elective photography, painting, and ceramics classes can take the AP Studio Art exams.
During their freshman year students are only able to take AP Human Geography. Sophomores are able to take certain AP classes such as AP World History and AP Biology. However it all depends on the courses they took the previous year. Students are able to take most of the offered AP classes by their junior year. The AP classes that juniors are able to take include AP Computer Science Principles, AP English Literature and Composition, AP Spanish Language, AP United States History, AP Chemistry, AP Physics B, AP Statistics, AP Calculus AB and AP Calculus BC. By their senior year, most students have taken at least one AP class and are able to take AP English Language and Composition, AP Spanish Language, AP Macroeconomics/AP Microeconomics (same class), AP European History, AP United States Government, AP Studio Art, AP Chemistry, AP Physics B, AP Statistics, AP Calculus AB and AP Calculus BC.


=== Electives ===
The electives offered to students are as follows: Journalism, Drama, Piano, Jazz Band/Orchestra, Chorus, Photography, Ceramics, Painting, Film, Constitutional Law/Criminal Law, Debate/Public Speaking, SAT Preparation (after school), Negotiations/Leadership, Psychology, Microbiology, Environmental Science, C# Visual Programming, HTML Web Design and Forensic Science, Organic Chemistry.


== Arts ==
The school has studios designed for classes in Piano, Jazz Band/Orchestra, Chorus, Drama, Painting (with north light windows), Ceramics, and Photography. In addition to the SING! program, Goldstein produces other theatrical performances throughout the year, showcasing students from the Drama and Chorus classes. There are also winter and spring concerts in which the school’s Jazz Band and orchestra, Chorus, and Piano students perform for the student body and parents. The school’s piano students also give a recital at the end of every school year. An annual exhibition of student artwork is displayed in the art gallery of Kingsborough Community College every January; the gallery exhibition opening incorporates talks by the art and music students along with performances of the LMG student Jazz Ensemble and Chamber Chorus. The school has a small art collection, including the painting "Freedom of Artistic Expression" by Frank Herbert Mason, the sculpture "Genius" by Ralph Helmick and Stu Schechter, as well as paintings, sculptures and photography by former students. Students at LMGHS have earned the NYC Chancellor’s Arts Endorsed Diploma.


== Sports ==
Leon M. Goldstein High School varsity sports teams include the basketball team, swimming team, bowling team, soccer team, wrestling team, tennis team, girls volleyball team, handball team, and golf team. LMG also has an active cheerleading squad called the "Boosters".
A popular school tradition is to hold Students vs. Faculty basketball and volleyball games every school year.


== Clubs and activities ==


=== Student government and School Leadership Team ===
LMGHS has an active student government, which is elected every May. The school maintains positions for president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, and student representatives from each grade. There is also a Senior Council composed of a president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, and two cabinet members. The Senior Council is responsible for organizing senior events, voicing concerns of the senior class to the administration, and keeping the senior class informed. Student representatives are also elected to serve on the LMGHS School Leadership Team. That team consists of representatives from the school administration, parents, teachers and students. The SLT meets monthly to discuss and work on issues related to implementation of the school’s mission and vision.


=== SING! ===
SING! is held annually at LMGHS. It is a competitive musical theater production pairing the Seniors and Freshmen versus the Juniors and Sophomores. SING! is student run and consists of writing, song, dance, acting, costume design, and stage design, etc. This popular after-school activity runs from September to December.


=== Clubs ===
Goldstein has scheduled a "Club Hour" on Wednesday afternoons for the various student clubs to meet. Currently there are over 50 registered clubs at LMGHS including: Robotics Club, Basketball Club, Art Club, Science Olympiad Club-Team, Fashion Club, Technical Theater/Scenic Design/Stage Crew, Yearbook Staff, School Newspaper Staff, Computer Tech Squad, Fishing Club, Hispanic Heritage Club, Italian-American Heritage Club,  Muslim Heritage Club, Jewish Heritage Club, Chess Club, Book Club, Red Cross Club, Computer Science/Programming Club, Film Club, and Medical Club.


=== National organizations ===
LMGHS students are members in several important national organizations such as Key Club and a Chapter of People to People International. Both of these clubs award community service credits to members who participate in club activities, and often involve the entire student body and school community through their activities. There is a chapter of the National Math Honor Society Mu Alpha Theta which involves students who are highly proficient in mathematics. Goldstein also has Arista and Archon chapters of the National Honor Society; student membership in the Arista/Archon chapters is awarded for exemplary work in community service and academic achievement. In addition, students can join a variety of other honor societies including Rho Kappa, Sigma Tau Delta, and the Tri-M Music Honor Society.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website