Hal Leonard Corporation

Hal Leonard LLC (formerly Hal Leonard Corporation) is an American music publishing and distribution company founded in Winona, Minnesota, by Harold "Hal" Edstrom, his brother, Everett "Leonard" Edstrom, and fellow musician Roger Busdicker. Currently headquartered in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, it is the largest sheet music publisher in the world.


== History ==
The company produces sheet music, songbooks, and method book (with CD) packs, and band, orchestra, and choral arrangements, reference books, instructional DVDs, videos CD-ROMs, ShowTrax instrumental accompaniments, and music software.In 1989, Hal Leonard acquired Jenson Publications and its catalog of band, orchestra, and choral titles.
In 1995, Hal Leonard began distributing Homespun Music Instruction CDs and DVDs. A mail-order company before joining Hal Leonard's distribution network, Homespun is a producer of instructional video and audio materials. 
In 2004, Hal Leonard acquired Applause Theatre and Cinema Books.In 2006, Hal Leonard acquired Amadeus Press and Limelight Editions. Also in 2006, Hal Leonard acquired Backbeat Books, which publishes the AllMusic reference guide and other music-related publications, from CMP.In 2009, Hal Leonard acquired Shawnee Press from Music Sales Group.In 2014, Hal Leonard acquired Noteflight, an online music notation service and a community for sharing scores.Private equity firm Seidler Equity Partners acquired majority ownership of the company in June 2016. Following the change in ownership, Hal Leonard was reorganized from a corporation to a limited liability company.
In 2017, Hal Leonard acquired the online music retailer Sheet Music Plus.
In December 2018, Hal Leonard announced it had sold five of its trade imprints—Hal Leonard Books, Applause Theatre & Cinema Books, Amadeus Press, Backbeat Books, and Limelight Editions—to Rowman & Littlefield.


== Present status ==
As of 2019, Hal Leonard publishes, distributes, and represents the print music interests for a myriad of publishing companies, both classical and popular. In North America, Hal Leonard is the exclusive licensee of the print rights for Disney Music Group and Universal Music Publishing Group. Hal Leonard is also the North American distributor of numerous American and European classical publishers, including G. Schirmer, Inc., Boosey & Hawkes, Durand Salabert Eschig, and Faber Music. Through its acquisition of numerous school music publishing companies over the past 40 years, Hal Leonard is currently one of the largest music publishers in the field of music education; its primary competitor in the educational market is Alfred Music.


== References ==


== External links ==
Keith Murdak NAMM Oral History Interview (2003)
Larry Morton NAMM Oral History Interview (2012)
Dan Bauer NAMM Oral History Interview (2014)