Dutchtown High School (Louisiana)

Dutchtown High School is a 5A school that was completed in 2003 in Geismar, an unincorporated area of Ascension Parish. It is within the Ascension Parish School Board. Both Dutchtown Middle School and Prairieville Middle School feed into Dutchtown High. The architecture is based on that of the old Dutchtown High, which was situated across the highway at the current Dutchtown Middle School.
There are a variety of classes offered at Dutchtown, though everyone is encouraged to take the core 4: science, social studies, math, and English. The opportunity to earn TOPS to get into an in-state university is also provided.
According to the Louisiana School Performance Scores/Letter Grades released by the Louisiana Department of Education, Dutchtown High School is an "A" school and is the #1 high-performing open-enrollment public high school in the state of Louisiana.In 2017, Dutchtown High School was named a 2017 World-Leading Learner and invited to join the Global Learning Network (GLN), a community of educators from schools that develop, practice, and share innovative approaches to education.


== Academics ==
Dutchtown High School is a comprehensive public senior high school. DTHS has an Honors program and an Advanced Placement program. The school offers 15 Advanced Placement Courses.


== AP Courses Offered ==
Art History
Biology II
Calculus AB & BC
Chemistry II
Computer Science A
Computer Science Principles
English Language and Composition (English III)
English Literature and Composition (English IV)
European History
Human Geography
Physics
Psychology
Sociology
Studio Art 2D-Design
Studio Art Drawing
U.S. Government and Politics
U.S. History
Writing Seminar
World History


== Dual Enrollment/Early Start ==
In an effort to assist students earn college hours while enrolled in high school, Dutchtown High School offers classes through Southeastern University to seniors who are eligible to enroll in the courses. These courses are presented at Dutchtown in partnership with Southeastern faculty.Courses being offered as Early Start courses:

American History I and II (Hist 201/202)
English (Engl 101 and Engl 102)
General Biology I (Gbio 151)
Music Appreciation (Mus 151)
World History I and II (Hist 101/102)Additionally, Dutchtown partners with Louisiana State University's Dual Enrollment program to offer a Chemistry credit.


== Freshman Academy ==
The Freshman Academy at Dutchtown High School is divided into four teams - black, white, silver, and purple - and students are placed on a team that consists of the same English, math, physical science, and civics teachers. Each week, each team selects a Student of the Week.
On December 18, 2017, Dutchtown High opened an $12.8 million official Freshman Academy, which will serve over 600 freshmen.


== Allied Health ==
Career Pathways

Emergency Health Care
Health Professionals
Nursing
Nutrition & Food
Sports Medicine
PharmacyCommunity Involvement/Volunteering
Some of the activities they are involved in include:
The American Association Heart Walk, Juvenile Diabetes Walk, Toys for Tots, Special Olympics, Blood Drives, Relay for Life, Christmas gifts for needy children/families
As a junior in this program, students are required to complete at least two consecutive hours of volunteer work per month in a medical-related facility or activity.
Letterman's Jacket & Graduation Cords
The Allied Health Center students who have been active and remained in good standing in the program for three (3) consecutive years may purchase an academic letterman's jacket.  Patches and caduceus inserts will be provided for senior level students. 
Students who have been active and remained in good standing in the program for three (3) consecutive years will be rewarded with a graduation cord to be worn during graduation ceremonies.
Internships/Clinicals
Internship, Certified Nurse Assistant, EMT Basic, and Pharmacy Tech are courses designed to give students a chance to watch and possibly experience firsthand some of the daily activities of a medical professional, and possibly attain certification.  These courses are taken during the student's senior year.  While in these programs, students are expected to exhibit professionalism and should treat their work site experiences like a job.  Entrance into these programs is competitive.


== Athletics ==
CROSS COUNTRY
VOLLEYBALL
FOOTBALL
SWIMMING
WRESTLING
BOYS BASKETBALL
GIRLS BASKETBALL
BOYS SOCCER
GIRLS SOCCER
TENNIS
GYMNASTICS
GOLF
TRACK & FIELD
SOFTBALL
BASEBALL
BOWLING


== Clubs and Organizations ==
4H
Band
Choir
Chess/ Game Club
Colorguard
Dungeons and Dragons
DECA
FBLA
FCCLA
Fellowship of Christian Athletes (FCA)
Foreign Language Club
Gallant Griffins
Griffin Girls
GSA
Homecoming
Interact Club
Jazz Band
Junior Class
JV Cheerleaders
Mentoring
Mu Alpha Theta
National Art Honor Society
National Honor Society
Newspaper
NJROTC
PBIS
Quiz Bowl
Scholarship Club
Senior Class
Skills USA
Speech and Debate
Spoken Word/Poetry Club
Sports Medicine
Thespian Society
Varsity Cheerleaders
Yearbook


== Student Media ==
Yearbook: Griffin Legend


== Community Support Organizations ==
Athletics Booster Club - CLAWS

Exists to serve as a vehicle for community involvement for the betterment of Dutchtown High School and to provide support for the students at Dutchtown High School.
Is a non-profit organization of teachers, parents, community businesses, and members.
Will be the liaison between the parents, teachers, and school adopters to coordinate projects needed and to promote the school through media outlets.
Will impact the ENTIRE student body.
Membership funds that are generated will be used for projects that impact the student body.
Membership requires a ONE TIME $5 fee per family.


== Instrumental Music Program ==
Dutchtown's marching and concert bands are directed by Ms. Sheily Bell, who has been teaching music for 37 years and has been awarded with Louisiana Bandmaster of the Year as well as the John Philip Sousa's Legion of Honor Award, presented to only 20 directors around the world. Ms. Bell is assisted by Mr. Daniel Modenbach. Dutchtown's marching band competes in a variety of competitions, including the Louisiana Showcase of Marching Bands. Dutchtown also hosts their own competition every fall and features dozens of bands from all over the state of Louisiana. In concert season, Dutchtown places numerous students into LMEA's all state concert  and also host an annual Christmas concert.


== Notable alumni ==
Eddie Lacy (Class of 2009), former University of Alabama running back and former running back for the Green Bay Packers and Seattle Seahawks of the National Football League (NFL); 2013 NFL Offensive Rookie of the Year; Pro Bowl (2013)
Eric Reid (Class of 2010), former Louisiana State University safety and current safety for the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League (NFL); Pro Bowl (2013)
Landon Collins (Class of  2012), former University of Alabama safety and current safety for the Washington Redskins of the National Football League (NFL); 3× Pro Bowl (2016–2018); First-team All-Pro (2016)
Justin Reid (Class of  2015), former Stanford University safety and current safety for the Houston Texans of the National Football League (NFL)


== References ==


== External links ==
Dutchtown High School on APSB website
Dutchtown High School on edline.net website
Ascension Parish School Board