Fiddler's Green

Fiddler's Green is a legendary afterlife, where there is perpetual mirth, a fiddle that never stops playing, and dancers who never tire.  
In 19th-century maritime folklore it was a kind of afterlife for sailors who have served at least 50 years at sea.


== In literature ==
Fiddler's Green appears in Frederick Marryat's novel The Dog Fiend; Or, Snarleyyow, published in 1856, as lyrics to a sailors' song:

Herman Melville describes a Fiddler's Green as a sailors' term for the place on land "providentially set apart for dance-houses, doxies, and tapsters" in his novella Billy Budd, Sailor,  in 1924.
Fiddler's Green is the title of a 1950 novel by Ernest K. Gann, about a fugitive criminal who works as a seaman after stowing away.The author Richard McKenna wrote a story, first published in 1967, entitled "Fiddler's Green", in which he considers the power of the mind to create a reality of its own choosing, especially when a number of people consent to it. The main characters in this story are also sailors, and have known of the legend of Fiddler's Green for many years.Fiddler's Green is an extrasolar colony mentioned in Robert A. Heinlein's novels The Cat Who Walks Through Walls and Friday.
In Neil Gaiman's The Sandman comic book series, Fiddler's Green is a place located inside of the Dreaming, a place that sailors have dreamed of for centuries. Fiddler's Green is also personified as a character as well as a location in the fictional world; the former largely based upon casual associations of G. K. Chesterton.
From November 12 to 14, 2004, a comic book convention promoted as "Fiddler's Green, A Sandman Convention" was held at the Millennium Hotel in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Author Neil Gaiman and several Sandman series artists and others involved in the series' publication participated in the convention, with profits benefiting the Comic Book Legal Defense Fund.
In George Romero's 2005 film Land of the Dead, the safe, upper-class high-rise condo building is called "Fiddler's Green."


== In music ==
A song called "Fiddler's Green" or more often "Fo'c'sle Song", was written by John Conolly, a Lincolnshire songwriter. It has been recorded by Tim Hart and Maddy Prior for their album Folk Songs of Olde England Vol. 2 (1968) and by The Dubliners for their album Plain and Simple (1973). The American sailor band Schooner Fare credits the song for bringing together their band. The song is sung worldwide in nautical and Irish traditional circles, and is often mistakenly thought to be a traditional song.
"Fiddler's Green" is a song from the album Road Apples by Canadian rock group The Tragically Hip, written for lead singer Gord Downie's young nephew Charles Gillespie, who died before the album was released.
"Fiddler's Green" is a song from Marley's Ghost's album Four Spacious Guys (1996).
Fiddler's Green is the title track of Tim O'Brien's Grammy Award-winning 2005 album.


== U.S. military ==
The Cavalrymen's Poem, also entitled "Fiddlers' Green" was published in the U.S. Army's Cavalry Journal in 1923 and became associated with the 1st Cavalry Division.

The name has had other military uses. Many places associated with the U.S. Military have been named Fiddler's Green:

The U.S. Marine Corps operates Firebase Fiddler's Green in the heart of the Helmand River Valley, in Helmand Province, Afghanistan.
An artillery Fire Support Base in Military Region III in Vietnam in 1972, occupied principally by elements of 2nd Squadron, 11th Armored Cavalry
The U.S. Navy's enlisted men's club in Sasebo, Japan from 1952 to 1976
The cavalryman's poem about Fiddler's Green is the regimental poem of the US 2nd Cavalry Regiment.
The enlisted men's club at Bainbridge Naval Training Center
An informal bar at the Fort Sill Officers' Open Mess
The stable and pasture used by Parsons Mounted Cavalry, a cadet group at Texas A&M University in College Station, Texas
A bar at the Saber & Quill in Fort Knox, Kentucky
The larger of the two bars at the Leader's Club at Fort Benning, Georgia
Building 2805 at Fort Hood, Texas, the former Officers Club
A small E-club on the U.S. Marine Corps' Camp Pendleton in area 43 (Las Pulgas)
The base pub at the Joint Forces Training Base, Los Alamitos, CA
Former dining facility used by 2nd Cavalry Regiment at Fort Polk, LA
An artillery only pub for the 10th Marine Regiment, Camp Lejeune, NC


== See also ==
Big Rock Candy Mountain
Cockaigne
Order of the Spur
Paradise
Tír na nÓg
Friends of Fiddler's Green


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Page, Michael; Ingpen, Robert (1985). Encyclopedia of Things that Never Were. Viking Press. ISBN 0-670-81607-8.
Fiddlers green – World Wide Words