Texas Killing Fields

Texas Killing Fields (also known as The Fields) is a 2011 American crime film directed by Ami Canaan Mann and starring Sam Worthington, Jeffrey Dean Morgan, Jessica Chastain and Chloë Grace Moretz. It competed in the 68th Venice International Film Festival in September.Several killings occur along Houston's I-45 corridor between Houston and Galveston, in and around an area known as "the killing fields". The film's screenplay was loosely inspired by true events surrounding the murders of women kidnapped from cities spread along 30 plus miles of I-45 corridor and dumped in many areas to include numerous bayous surrounding the oil fields of Texas City, Texas. While in real life there have been numerous itinerant serial killers involved over the years, the film focuses on specific local Texas City suspects.


== Plot ==
Homicide detectives Mike (Sam Worthington) and Brian (Jeffrey Dean Morgan) investigate the murder of a girl and the disappearance of a young woman. Meanwhile, Ann (Chloë Grace Moretz), a neglected local girl whose mother Lucie (Sheryl Lee) is a drug addict, goes missing.


== Cast ==
Sam Worthington as Detective Mike Souder
Jeffrey Dean Morgan as Detective Brian Heigh
Jessica Chastain as Detective Pam Stall
Chloë Grace Moretz as Little Anne Sliger
Jason Clarke as Rule
Annabeth Gish as Gwen Heigh
Sheryl Lee as Lucie Sliger
Stephen Graham as Rhino
James Hébert as Eugene Sliger
Sean Michael Cunningham as Sean Heigh
Leanne Cochran as Lila
Tony Bentley as Capt. Bender
Holly Ladnier as Emergency Call Director
Kirk Bovill as Boyfriend


== Production ==
The film was originally going to be directed by Danny Boyle before he left the project and was replaced by Ami Canaan Mann, daughter of director Michael Mann, who produced the film. Boyle said that the film was "so dark it would never get made".The film was distributed overseas by Entertainment Film Distributors, a British company. Filming began on May 3, 2010, in Louisiana, United States.


== Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack was scored by Dickon Hinchliffe (formerly of Tindersticks) except for three tracks credited to The Americans.


== Reception ==
Texas Killing Fields received mixed to negative reviews from critics. Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 37% based on 46 reviews, with a consensus that read, "Texas Killing Fields is a competent boilerplate crime thriller, brewing up characters and plots used in better films." Metacritic gave the film a rating of 49/100, based on 17 reviews.Roger Ebert of The Chicago Sun Times gave the film two out of four stars and said, "'Texas Killing Fields' begins along the lines of a police procedural and might have been perfectly absorbing if it had played by the rules: strict logic, attention to detail, reference to technical police work. Unfortunately, the movie often seems to stray from such discipline." Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times commented, "...like the Texas City killer's plans, something's gone terribly wrong." On a more lenient note, James Mottram of GamesRadar said, "Mann Jr. shows plenty of promise in a film that doesn’t tarnish the family name. But hindered by niggling flaws, it hardly revolutionises an over-saturated genre."


== References ==


== External links ==
Texas Killing Fields on IMDb
Texas Killing Fields at Rotten Tomatoes
Texas Killing Fields at Box Office Mojo