Parkland High School (Pennsylvania)

Parkland High School is a public high school located in South Whitehall Township, Pennsylvania. The school serves students in grades 9-12 and is the only high school for the Parkland School District.


== History ==
Parkland High School was formed in 1949 when North Whitehall Township and South Whitehall Township merged to create Parkland Union School District, with Upper Macungie Township joining in 1950. Its predecessor, South Whitehall High School, was housed in the current-day Troxell Building. Parkland used the same facility until a larger building on Route 309 in Orefield was completed in 1954, which served as the high school for 45 years. In 1999, the new and current Parkland High School building on Cedar Crest Boulevard in Allentown was opened due to overcapacity of the second building. The old school was renovated and renamed Orefield Middle School, replacing Troxell Junior High School. When viewed from above, the layout of the current building and grounds closely approximate the shape of the Millennium Falcon, a spacecraft featured in the Star Wars films.  School officials claim that the design was not deliberate.


== Athletics ==

Parkland competes in the East Penn Conference in District XI of the Pennsylvania Interscholastic Athletic Association.  Cumulatively among all of its sports, Parkland has secured fourteen Pennsylvania state championship titles.In 2011, 2014, and 2015, the girls volleyball team captured the PIAA AAA state title.In 2015, the boys volleyball team captured the PIAA state title.


== Notable alumni ==
Michaela Conlin, actress, Fox's Bones
Greg DeLong, former professional football player, Baltimore Ravens, Jacksonville Jaguars and Minnesota Vikings
Aimee Mullins, actress, World Trade Center
Chris Renaud, director, Despicable Me, Despicable Me 2, The Lorax, The Secret Life of Pets
Brenton L. Saunders, CEO of Allergan
Donald Snyder, former member of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives, 1981–2000, and Majority Whip
Brant Weidner, former professional basketball player, San Antonio Spurs
Lauren Weisberger, author, The Devil Wears Prada
Andre Williams, former professional football player, New York Giants and Los Angeles Chargers, and 2014 Heisman Trophy finalist


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website