Dirk Gently

Dirk Gently (born Svlad Cjelli, also known as Dirk Cjelli) is a fictional character created by English writer Douglas Adams and featured in the books Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency and The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul. He is portrayed as a pudgy man who normally wears a heavy old light brown suit, red checked shirt with a green striped tie, long leather coat, red hat and thick metal-rimmed spectacles. "Dirk Gently" is not the character's real name. It is noted early on in the first book that it is a pseudonym for "Svlad Cjelli".  Dirk himself states that the name has a "Scottish dagger feel" to it.


== Holistic detective ==
Dirk bills himself as a "holistic detective" who makes use of "the fundamental interconnectedness of all things" to solve the whole crime, and find the whole person. This involves running up large expense accounts and then claiming that every item (such as needing to go to a tropical beach in the Bahamas for three weeks) was, as a consequence of this "fundamental interconnectedness", actually a vital part of the investigation. Challenged on this point in the first novel, he claims that he cannot be considered to have ripped anybody off, because none of his clients have ever paid him.  His office is supposed to be located at 33a Peckender St. N1 London. As an investigator whose cases often take a paranormal twist, he challenges the notion that – as presented by Sherlock Holmes – "when you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth", citing as an example an incident where a young girl is somehow reciting the stock market prices exactly as they change but twenty-four hours earlier. As Dirk describes it, it is impossible that the girl is getting those figures out of thin air, but the alternative implausible explanation is that the girl is masterminding a complex scheme with no obvious benefit to herself; the first idea suggests that something is happening that nobody knows about, but the second suggests a scenario contrary to typical human behavior that is known about.
Gently is psychic, though he refuses to believe in such things, insisting that he merely has a "depressingly accurate knack for making wild assumptions". The depressing part is that he is seemingly unable to use this knack to win money on horses. As a student at Cambridge University (St. Cedd's College) he attempted to acquire money by selling exam papers for the upcoming tests. His fellow undergraduates were convinced that he was psychic and had produced the papers under hypnosis, while he claimed he had simply studied previous papers and determined potential patterns in questions. However, when his papers turned out to be exactly the same as the real ones, to the very comma, he was expelled from the university.


== Novels ==
Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency (1987)
The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul (1988)
The Salmon of Doubt: Hitchhiking the Galaxy One Last Time (2002) published posthumously, unfinished


== Aborted third book ==
Douglas Adams was working on a third Dirk Gently novel, The Salmon of Doubt, at the time of his death. However Adams said "A lot of the stuff which was originally in The Salmon of Doubt really wasn't working," and that he had planned on "salvaging some of the ideas that I couldn't make work in a Dirk Gently framework and putting them in a Hitchhiker framework... and for old time's sake I may call it The Salmon of Doubt." The first ten chapters of this novel, assembled from various drafts following Adams' death, together with a memo suggesting further plot points, appear in The Salmon of Doubt: Hitchhiking the Galaxy One Last Time.


== Adaptations and portrayals ==
The South Bank Show (1992) Dirk Gently was played by Michael Bywater in the TV documentary.
Dirk (2006) Scot Burklin portrayed Dirk in the 2006 American premiere of the play at The Road Theatre Company in Los Angeles.
Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency (2007) BBC Radio 4 played by Harry Enfield.
The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul (2008) BBC Radio 4 played by Harry Enfield.
Dirk Gently (2010, 2012) starred Stephen Mangan in the title role in a TV pilot broadcast on BBC4 in late 2010 and subsequently for a series of three episodes,  broadcast in early 2012.
Douglas Adams' Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency (2015 Comic book series) five-part comic book series by IDW, ran between May and November 2015, with a collected book The Interconnctedness of All Kingsin 2016. It uses the Dirk character, but new stories.
Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency - A Spoon too Short (2016 Comic book series) five-part comic book series by IDW, ran between February and June 2016, with a collected book published later that year. It featured input from some of the writing team that went on to work on the tv series.
Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency (2016) : in January 2016, BBC America ordered the production of eight episodes for a new TV series written by Max Landis and starring Samuel Barnett as the titular character, along with Elijah Wood as Todd and Hannah Marks as Amanda Brotzman, Todd’s sister.
Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency - The Salmon of Doubt (2016-17 Comic book series) nine-part comic book series by IDW, ran between October 2016 and July 2019, and re-published in two collected editions.


== References ==


== External links ==
BBC Dirk Gently guide
BBC4 Dirk Gently