Hellenic Football League

The Hellenic Football League is an English men's football league covering an area including the English counties of Worcestershire, Berkshire, Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire, southern Buckinghamshire, southern Herefordshire and northern Wiltshire. There is also one team each from Hampshire and Northamptonshire.


== History ==

The league was established in 1953. In the 2000–01 season the Hellenic League absorbed the Chiltonian League and now has a Premier Division, Division One East, Division One West and Division Two East, Division Two West feeding into them. In the 2006–07 season the Hellenic League absorbed the Banbury District and Lord Jersey FA Veterans League with three Divisions now under the Hellenic Veterans League title.
Starting with the 2004–05 re-organisation the Hellenic League became a step 5 and 6 league in the National League System. Premier Division clubs play at Step 5 level, which offers progression to the Southern Football League Division One (Step 4) for Premier Division winners who have the required ground status.
Hellenic League Division One teams play at Step 6 level, promotion to the Step 5 Premier Division can be gained by clubs finishing in the top two of Division One East and West dependent on required ground facilities as specified by The Football Association. Acceptance to HL Division One is offered to teams playing in the various Step 7 County Leagues of the related Hellenic League area or by finishing in the top two of Division Two with correct ground grading.
53 teams play in the Hellenic Premier and Division Ones. 18 teams play at Veterans level (players aged 35 or over)


== Champions ==
The league started with only a Premier Division, before Division One was added in 1956.

For the 1971–72 season, Division One was split into Division One A and Division One B.

The following season, Division One A and B were merged.

After the 1999–2000 season, Division One was regionalised into East and West.


== Cup winners ==
The Hellenic League football cups are the Floodlit Cup, the Supplementary Cup and the Challenge Cup.


== References ==


== External links ==
Hellenic Football League Official Website