Parmelia (fungus)

Parmelia is a genus of medium to large foliose lichens. The ends of the leaf-like lobes are often squarish-tipped. The upper surface is pale bluish-gray to light brown in direct sunlight, with a network web-like ridges and depressions. The lower surface is black and has rhizines anchoring it to the substrate.It has a global distribution, extending from the Arctic to the Antarctic continent but concentrated in temperate regions. 125 species have been recorded on the Indian sub-continent. Depending on whether the circumscription of the genus is considered in the narrow sense (sensu strico) or the broad sense (sensu lato), there are between 50 and 1322 species worldwide. It is a foliaceous lichen, resembling a leaf in shape. In recent years, the genus Parmelia has been divided into a number of smaller genera according to thallus morphology.


== Description and ecology ==
In general, Parmelia have a dark lower side with rhizines ('rootlets') which attach the lichen to its substrate. The upper side may be several colours - grey, yellow, brown - and may have reproductive organs on it. These may be apothecia (spore producing bodies), isidia or soralia (both vegetative structures). In between these two layers is the medulla which contains the algal component of the lichen.
Parmelia perlata is called Dagad (north India), patthar ke phool (Hindi), kallu hoovu (Kannada),  kallu pachi (Telugu), kal pasi (Tamil). It is used as a spice that provides a distinct, unmistakable flavor.
Parmelia lichens are food for the caterpillars of certain Lepidoptera, such as the bagworm moth Taleporia tubulosa.


== Species ==
Parmelia asiatica
Parmelia adaugescens 
Parmelia barrenoae 
Parmelia cochleata 
Parmelia collenma
Parmelia discordans 
Parmelia encryptata 
Parmelia ernstiae 
Parmelia erumpens 
Parmelia fertilis 
Parmelia fraudans 
Parmelia homogenes 
Parmelia hygrophila 
Parmelia imbricaria 
Parmelia lindmanii 
Parmelia marmariza 
Parmelia martinicana 
Parmelia mayi 
Parmelia omphalodes 
Parmelia perlata – black stone flower
Parmelia pinnatifida 
Parmelia praesquarrosa 
Parmelia pseudolaevior 
Parmelia pseudotenuirima 
Parmelia saxatilis – salted shield lichen
Parmelia serrana 
Parmelia shinanoana 
Parmelia skultii 
Parmelia squarrosa − bottlebrush shield lichen
Parmelia subdivaricata 
Parmelia submontana 
Parmelia subtestacea 
Parmelia sulcata − hammered shield lichen
Parmelia sulymae 
Parmelia tenuirima 
Parmelia tiliacea


== References ==


== External links ==
Plantguide.org Profile