Purcell School

The Purcell School for Young Musicians is a specialist music school for children, located in the town of Bushey, south Hertfordshire, England, and is the oldest specialist music school in the UK.  The school was awarded the UNESCO Mozart Medal in 2003, which was received on behalf of the school by Prince Charles, who is a patron of the school.  Sir Simon Rattle is honorary president of the school. Many of the pupils subsequently study at the Royal College of Music or Royal Academy of Music. In 2015, the School became the very first Fazioli Pianoforti Centre of Excellence.
The School‘s pupils are funded largely by the Government's Music and Dance Scheme, along with the School’s own scholarship funds. It has a consistent success in national and international competitions and has an extensive programme of outreach and community work. The majority of pupils progress to music conservatoires although a small number each year elect to go to University to study both music and non-musical subjects.


== History ==
Rosemary Rapaport and Irene Forster founded the school in 1962 under the original name of the Central Tutorial School for Young Musicians, at Conway Hall in central London.  The school later moved to Morley College, and subsequently to Hampstead, then a large Victorian house in Harrow on the Hill.  The school changed its name to The Purcell School (after the English composer Henry Purcell) in 1973.  In 1997, the School relocated to the site of the former Royal Caledonian School campus in Bushey, Hertfordshire.


== Notable former pupils ==

Martin James Bartlett, BBC Young Musician of the Year 2014
Katharine Blake, Kelly McCusker and Jocelyn West, vocalists and founder members of the a cappella ensemble Miranda Sex Garden
Peter Bradley-Fulgoni, Anglo-Italian pianist
Daisy Chute, singer with classical-pop group All Angels
Robert Cohen, cellist
Jacob Collier, two time Grammy awarded singer, arranger, composer, producer, and multi-instrumentalist
Nicholas Daniel, oboist
Anne Denholm, harpist, Official Harpist to the Prince of Wales 2015
Julius Drake, pianist
Catrin Finch, harpist
Teo Gheorghiu, pianist and actor
Ploypailin Mahidol Jensen, pianist, a granddaughter of King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand.
Oliver Knussen, composer and conductor
Oliver Lewis, virtuoso violinist
Jack Liebeck, violinist
Lara Melda, BBC Young Musician of the Year, 2010
Micachu, experimental pop musician
Leona Naess, singer-songwriter
Sarah Oates, violinist and associate leader Philharmonia orchestra
Joseph Phibbs, composer
Paul Sartin, oboist, violinist and singer with Bellowhead, and others
Alexander Scherbakov, violinist, conductor and pedagogue
Yevgeny Sudbin, concert pianist
Yiruma, South Korean pianist
Georgina Born, anthropologist of music


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Profile on the ISC website