University of Karachi

The University of Karachi (UoK) (Urdu: جامعۂ كراچى‎; Sindhi: ڪراچي يونيورسٽي‎; informally Karachi University (KU)) is a public university located in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. It is one of the oldest universities in Pakistan being established as a federal university in 1951. Its chief architect was Khan Bahadur Mirza Mohsin Baig.With a total student body of 51,380 full-time students and a campus size spanning over 1200 acres, Karachi University is Pakistan's largest university with a distinguished reputation for multi-disciplinary research in science and technology, medical research and social sciences.  The university spans over 53 Departments and 19 world-class research institutes operating under nine faculties. There are over 893 academics and more than 2500 supporting staff working for the university.In 2009, the university was named by now defunct THE-QS World University Rankings for the top 500 universities in the world, while it is ranked by QS ranking's in 2016 as among to the top 250 in Asia and among 701st in the world. In 2019 it was ranked 801st in the world and 251 in Asia. The research at the university is ranked as 'high'. The university has been affiliated with world-renowned and notable scholars have been associated and affiliated with the university as faculty, researchers, or alumni since its establishment.The university is a member of Association of Commonwealth Universities of the United Kingdom.


== History ==
At the time of establishment of Pakistan as a sovereign state in 1947, the means for higher education and research were negligible and diminished in the country.  Responding to the impending requirement of higher learning, Pakistan Government started establishing relevant educational institutions of higher learning and research and thus underwent rapid modernization under a policy guided by Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan.  After a heavy political lobbying backed by the residents of Karachi, the University of Karachi was established through parliamentary authorization as a "Federal University" in 1951. On 23 October 1950, the Karachi University Act was authorized and after an amendment in 1951, it was enacted by the Prime Minister of Pakistan Liaquat Ali Khan. Its first Vice-chancellor was All India Muslim League activist and political scientist, Dr. ABA Haleem. In 1953 it started its teaching and research activities at two faculties: the Faculty of Arts and the Faculty of Science.For the first two years, the University of Karachi remained as an examination university for the affiliated colleges. Over the years, the enrollment expanded so rapidly that the its status was redefined by the government as a "federal research university" of Sindh, which was officially attained in 1962. Opened with an intake of 50 students, the university now has 53 academic departments and 20 Research Centers and Institutes, under faculties of Social Sciences, Science, Islamic Studies, Engineering, Law, Pharmacy, Management and Administrative Sciences and Medicines. The enrollment of regular students at the campus is around 28,000. There are about 1,000 faculty members and more than 3,000 supporting staff. On 18 January 1960, the university was shifted to the new campus on a plot of 1,279 acres (5.18 km2) located on the Country Club Road (now University Road, passing through the Gulistan-e-Jauhar), under the vice-chancellorship of Prof. Dr. Basheer Ahmad Hashmi on 22 June 1961.


=== Past appointed Vice-Chancellors ===


== Campus ==

The university campus is spread over 1,279 acres (5.18 km2) of land, situated 12 km away from the city center of Karachi. About four percent of the university's students are foreigners who come from 23 different countries in regions as diverse as Central Asia, South Asia, the Middle East and Europe. The university has a high standard of teaching, with many professors being well-known scholars and academics of international repute and possessing Ph.D. and D.Sc. degrees from abroad. In a short span of 40 years, the university has risen to acquire a high status in the field of education in Pakistan as well as regionally.


=== Academic emphasis ===
The most prestigious research center of the university is the International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences which has over 500 students enrolled for PhD in organic chemistry, biochemistry, molecular medicine, genomics, nanotechnology and other fields. The Husein Ebrahim Jamal Research Institute of Chemistry, Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Development and the Jamil-ur-Rahman Center for Genome Research are an integral part of this multi-disciplinary research centre. It was selected as the UNESCO Center of Excellence in 2016. The university's physics and statistics departments are well known departments and its research output plays a vital role in the development of science and technology in the country.Furthermore, the department of mathematical sciences is one of the largest departments in the Faculty of Science, which has a three-floor building consisting of an electronic laboratory for computational mathematics.The department of architecture (or visual studies) has produced award-winning designers, architects and artists, who are making their mark in the professional world.


=== Library system ===

The University of Karachi's library, known as "Dr. Mahmud Hussain Library", has houses well over 400,000 volumes dating back to the 1600s, for researchers as well as for use by students of advance studies and faculty members.  The library became the depository of the personal book collection of Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan. Established and constructed in 1952, the Dr. Mahmud Hussain Library is an imposing five story and basement structure firmly placed in the center of campus activities.  Teachers from over 100 affiliated colleges frequent the university, along with scholars from 19 research institutions. A loan and resource sharing system exists with other academic entities in the Karachi area. A digital library enables the scholars and students to access online books and journals. 25 librarians, 10 assistant librarians and around 90 nonprofessional staff help maintain the library. The building includes six reading rooms for general purposes and six for research. The International Centre for Chemical and Biological Sciences has within it the Latif Ebrahim Jamal Science Information Centre which is the national focal point for distance educationPreviously called the Karachi University Library, it was renamed the Dr. Mahmud Hussain Library by unanimous resolution of the Karachi University Syndicate on 12 April 1976— the first death anniversary of Prof. Dr. Mahmud Hussain Khan. Mahmud Hussain served the university's Vice-Chancellor from 1971 to 1975 and the library was named in recognition of his contribution to the teaching of social sciences in Pakistan. Dr. Hussain was the first professor the university appointed to its faculty of International Relations and History. He introduced library science to Pakistan by instituting the Faculty of Journalism and Library Science at the university. He also actively worked to improve the status and pay scales of the library staff to make them at par with the university's other faculty members.


== Karachi University Press ==
The university publishes books, texts, periodicals and other academic materials in-house through the Bureau of Composition, Compilation and Translation (BCC&T).


== Faculties and Departments ==
The University of Karachi has 9 faculties:


== Research institutes and centres ==


== Alumnus and people ==

Since its establishment in 1951, the university has attracted prominent scholars and renowned educationist as its faculty members, researchers and associated scholars. Ravindra Kaushik , Scholars and educationists such as Iqbal Hussain Qureshi, Rafiuddin Raz, Mahmud Hussain, Saleemuzzaman Siddiqui, Abdul Qadeer Khan, I H Qureshi, Raziuddin Siddiqui, Atta-ur-Rahman, Prof.Khursheed Ahmed are few that have been affiliated with the institution. The faculty was drawn not only from Pakistan but also included eminent educationists from the United Kingdom and the United States.


== See also ==

Higher Education Commission (Pakistan)
List of universities in Karachi
Pakistan Educational Research Network
Pakistan Engineering Council
Pharmacy Council of Pakistan
Pakistan Bar Council


== References ==


== External links ==
UoK official website
UoK Network