Fielding Graduate University

Fielding Graduate University (previously Fielding Graduate Institute and The Fielding Institute) is a private university in Santa Barbara, California. It offers postgraduate and doctoral studies mainly in psychology, education, and organizational studies, primarily through distance education programs.
Fielding Graduate University was founded in 1974 by Frederic M. Hudson, Hallock Hoffman, and Renata Tesch. They designed Fielding as a graduate program for mid-career professionals who were not being served by traditional universities.


== Academics ==
The university offers graduate programs for adult professionals seeking master's and doctoral degrees. It offers degree and certificate programs through the School of Psychology and School of Leadership Studies. The programs include online learning, individual faculty-student mentoring and assessment, and in-person events of various types in many locations throughout the year. The professions targeted include clinical psychology, media psychology, educational leadership, organizational leadership, and human development, within the corporate, nonprofit, and public sectors. Fielding was the first university to offer a Ph.D program in media psychology.Fielding's learning model implements a student learning plan, contract-based learning, competency-based assessment, student-to-student peer feedback, project and portfolio reviews, and final thesis or dissertation. The school's website says that its "distributed learning model" combines "in-person" and "remote" participation.As of 2018, its School of Leadership offers "accelerated" Ph.D. degrees that can be earned in as little as three years, and its School of Psychology offers a Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology that can be earned in five or six years.


== Accreditation ==
Fielding Graduate University is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization accredited by the WASC Senior College and University Commission (WSCUC).


== Reputation ==
Fielding Graduate University was selected as a member of the Carnegie Project on the Education Doctorate (CPED), a collaboration of 87 institutions focused on redesigning doctorate in education (EdD) programs. It also was one of 240 schools selected for the 2015 Community Engagement Classification from the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.The university has been named one of the Top 100 Graduate Degree Producers for Minorities by Diverse Issues in Higher Education magazine.


== Partnerships ==
Fielding offers a doctorate in Creative Leadership through the University of the Virgin Islands (UVI), is developing a doctoral program in urban leadership and entrepreneurship with the University of District of Columbia and Tulane University’s Payson Center for Global Development, and established the Center for the Advancement of STEM Leadership with UVI, North Carolina A&T, and the Association of American Colleges & Universities. The latter earned a $9 million National Science Foundation grant in 2018.


== Notable alumni ==
Evelyn Torton Beck - feminist theorist and professor at University of Maryland, College Park
Tara Brach - psychologist and meditation expert
Marshall Colt - television actor, psychologist
K. Drorit "Dee" Gaines - neuropsychiatrist and radio host
Devon Jersild - psychologist and author
Janja Lalich - sociologist studying cults
Gina Loudon - Republican activist
Marilyn Price-Mitchell - psychologist and columnist
Judith Sewell Wright - American author, speaker, lifestyles expert and life coach


== Notable faculty ==
Tiffany Field - psychologist
Ruthellen Josselson - clinical psychologist
Malcolm Knowles - adult education scholar
Jeremy J. Shapiro - psychologist and social theorist


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website