Hi-5 (Australian band)

Hi-5 are an Australian children's musical group, formed in 1998 in association with the children's television series of the same name. The group is composed of five performers who entertain and educate preschool-aged children through music, movement and play. Helena Harris and Posie Graeme-Evans created Hi-5 as a Nine Network television series, which premiered in 1999.
The original members were Kellie Crawford, Kathleen de Leon Jones, Nathan Foley, Tim Harding and Charli Robinson. Four of their albums reached the top 10 on the ARIA Albums Chart, It's a Party (No. 4, July 2000), Boom Boom Beat (No. 3, August 2001), It's a Hi-5 Christmas (No. 4, December 2001) and Hi-5 Hits (No. 10, July 2003). The original members had all departed from the group by the end of 2008, following de Leon Jones, who went on maternity leave in 2006. The membership has since changed several times. The members have starred in numerous television series, released music albums, and performed on worldwide tours. The television series features puppet characters Chatterbox and Jup Jup, who are also included in the group's live stage shows.
Hi-5 were one of Australia's highest paid entertainment entities, placing in the Business Review Weekly's annual list several times, earning an estimated A$18million in 2009. The members of Hi-5 are employees of the brand, once owned by the Nine Network, and do not hold equity. Their albums have been certified by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) as double platinum (It's a Party), platinum (Jump and Jive with Hi-5, Boom Boom Beat, It's a Hi-5 Christmas) and gold (Celebrate). By 2004, the original line-up had received five consecutive ARIA Music Awards in the same category, Best Children's Album, a then-record. By that time they had also received three Logie Television Awards for Most Outstanding Children's Program. 
The newer iterations of the group did not experience the same popularity or critical success as the original line-up. Hi-5 were last nominated for a major Australian award in 2012 and have not released an album since 2014. The brand was sold by the Nine Network to Malaysian-based group Asiasons in 2012, who shifted the band's commercial focus to the Southeast Asian market. After an attempted television revival in 2017, the group's production company relocated to Singapore and began employing a roster of temporary performers for touring purposes.


== History ==


=== Formation ===
Hi-5 were formed in 1998 in Sydney, Australia as a children's musical group. Television producer Helena Harris, who had worked on Bananas in Pyjamas, co-created Hi-5 as a concept for a new television show. She and co-producer Posie Graeme-Evans developed the series as preschool entertainment, blending educational theories with a pop music appeal, using music and movement to capture the attention of children. The band's work was designed to have multiple layers and cater for a wide range of ages in the audience, while being primarily aimed at those aged 2–8. Featuring five performers, the cast were intended to act as older siblings of the audience, rather than adults teaching children. Harris has stated that Hi-5 was primarily a television series, but the music itself had the ability to stand alone. The name of the group was derived from the high five gesture.Harris stated that her inspiration for Hi-5 came partly from living in England, where she realised she could develop a show with universal appeal, with accessible themes such as family and animals. She strove to incorporate items of current interest to keep children engaged, and modelled the style of the group on the fast-paced nature of contemporary music videos. Harris also recalled watching pop group, the Spice Girls, who she believed were dancing moves of a standard which preschoolers could replicate. The creators saw the need for "life-affirming" television for rapidly maturing preschoolers, and found that most children learned from shows which incorporated movement and song.After auditions for the group in June 1998 (narrowing down around 300 people to only five), the television pilot for Hi-5 was produced in mid 1998, with the original cast consisting of Kellie Crawford (née Hoggart), Kathleen de Leon Jones, Nathan Foley, Tim Harding and Charli Robinson, who were aged between 18 and 24 at the time of filming. After being commissioned and filmed, the series first aired in April 1999. The corresponding debut album, Jump and Jive with Hi-5, was released in September by Sony Music and reached No. 33 on the ARIA Albums Chart. The group toured around Sydney in their first year.


=== Early success ===

Hi-5 won the 2000 Logie Award for Most Outstanding Children's Program, and ARIA Award for Best Children's Album for Jump and Jive with Hi-5. Hi-5 continued to film one television series and record one music album each year, with their releases consistently receiving album accreditations; Celebrate was certified as gold, while Jump and Jive with Hi-5, Boom Boom Beat and It's a Hi-5 Christmas went platinum, and It's a Party received double platinum status. Four of their albums reached the top 10 on the ARIA Albums Chart, It's a Party (No. 4, July 2000), Boom Boom Beat (No. 3, August 2001), It's a Hi-5 Christmas (No. 4, December 2001) and Hi-5 Hits (No. 10, July 2003). Hi-5 also toured nationally every year, with sell-out concerts in venues such as the Sydney Opera House. The quintet's production of Hi-5 Alive won the 2002 Helpmann Award for Best Presentation for Children. In 2001, the members stated that they did not expect that Hi-5 would become so successful; Robinson explained that it was not until they went on tour that they realised their popularity. Crawford described the band as "a pop group for kids".In 2002, Crawford and Foley entered a romantic relationship. The couple were engaged in 2005, however called off the wedding plans in late 2006.The television series premiered in the UK in early 2003, which led the group to tour in 2004 with sell-out shows. In 2005, Hi-5 performed in arena venues around Australia, in order to maximise the audience capacity. In October 2015, Robinson estimated that the group spent nine months of every year touring. She expressed that she had tried to leave after eight years but was convinced by producers to stay, and that the following years spent with the group were her favourite.


=== Replacement of original members ===
In early 2006, de Leon Jones announced she was pregnant, and would take maternity leave from April onwards. Sun Park was introduced as her temporary replacement, while de Leon Jones gave birth to her first child in July. Park was part of the television series filming in 2006, and toured with the group across Australia and New Zealand over 2006 and 2007. In July 2006, de Leon Jones stated that she was intent on returning to Hi-5, however in July 2007, made the decision to permanently leave the group to focus on being a mother. Park took her place as a permanent member with the group.

Harding was involved in a serious motorcycle accident in June 2007, which left him unable to keep up with the high energy of Hi-5. Just a few days before this, Stevie Nicholson had been hired as an understudy, and put straight into work as a temporary replacement for Harding. The group toured the Hi-5 Circus Stageshow in 2007, with the theme of circus incorporating tricks such as trapeze, tightrope walking and gymnastics. Nicholson debuted on tour with the Circus show in Singapore. Harding announced his permanent departure in November after recovering from injuries; Nicholson took his place as a permanent member.Robinson (by then Delaney) announced her exit from the group in February 2008. She expressed an interest in proving herself as a figure for an adult audience, and stated she would help find a replacement member. After leaving, she went on to find success presenting in the Australian media industry. In April, Casey Burgess was announced as Robinson's replacement, and began touring with the group.The Hi-5 brand was purchased by the Nine Network, along with production company Southern Star, in March 2008. The change of ownership saw Harris and Graeme-Evans end their involvement with the franchise, which was placed under the direction of Martin Hersov and Cathy Payne, also Nine and Southern Star executives.

It was announced in October 2008 that Crawford would be leaving the group at the end of the year to explore other options. A month later, last remaining original member Foley also announced his departure. He expressed interest in focusing on his adult music career. In December, News.com.au's Confidential reporter alleged that Hi-5's production company had asked Crawford and Foley to leave, and that the producers were "opting to recruit younger, cheaper performers." The pair did not respond to these reports. Later in December, Park also announced she would be leaving the group since she had expected only to be a temporary replacement. Park denied the industry rumours, saying that there had been no pressure for any of them to resign. The departing members had their final performance at Carols by Candlelight on Christmas Eve in Melbourne.


=== Second generation ===
In February 2009, Lauren Brant, Fely Irvine and Tim Maddren were announced to be joining Nicholson and Burgess, forming the line-up known as the "new generation". Of the large membership change, Burgess revealed it had been a difficult period of transition, generating uncertainty over the band's future. The new-look group toured Australia in early 2010, to build an audience and establish a connection with more regional locations throughout the country. The group also celebrated the 500th episode of the television series in 2010, and in 2011 reintroduced a number of the group's original songs to the newer audience. The new line-up did not experience the same reception as the original members, and were criticised for their vocal abilities.Irvine's final performance as part of Hi-5 was at Carols by Candlelight on Christmas Eve 2011, with a network representative stating she would leave to explore "other career options". Her replacement, Dayen Zheng, joined the group in January 2012. Maddren described Zheng as having a great energy and being a "perfect fit". Burgess and Maddren announced their departures on Christmas Eve 2012. Maddren had secured a role in the Australian musical production of The Addams Family, while Burgess had decided to further her solo music career.

In June 2012, the Nine Network announced that the Hi-5 brand has been sold in its entirety to Malaysian-based equity group, Asiasons, following Nine's ongoing financial difficulties. Datuk Jared Lim, Asiason's managing director, revealed plans to expand Hi-5 throughout Southeast Asia, while keeping the group's presence in Australia intact. Julie Greene, former producer of the television series, assumed the role of executive creative director.


=== Third generation: Shift to Southeast Asia ===
New members Mary Lascaris and Ainsley Melham were announced to be joining Nicholson, Brant and Zheng in early 2013. The audition process was filmed and turned into a documentary style cinematic release, Some Kind of Wonderful, which premiered exclusively through Hoyts Cinemas in Australia from March. This line-up were branded as a "new generation" of the group by press.Throughout this period, the production company shifted the commercial focus of the group to the Southeast Asian market, with an increase in Asian touring locations. In 2014, the group premiered in the Middle East with a Dubai tour, and returned to Bangkok for the first time in ten years. A sold-out run of concerts in the Philippines saw the group return for an encore season in 2015. 
A new television series entitled Hi-5 House was filmed in Singapore and Malaysia between 2013 and 2015, premiering on pay-TV channel Nick Jr. in Australia and also airing on Disney Junior in Asia.  The success of the series in Asia resulted in an Asian Television Award for Best Preschool Program in 2015. The series premiered worldwide on online television streaming service Netflix in March 2016. The group also toured New Zealand in 2016, for the first time since 2008.By 2015, the group noted that some of their audience now included parents who had watched Hi-5 as children. Former member Robinson, then radio presenter, described the extended Hi-5 cast as "alumni" which she enjoyed being a part of, using her job to stay in contact with the current members.Brant's final performances were in July 2014 for the Australian House Hits tour, in which the cast wore costumes she designed under her new fashion label, Loliboli. Her successor, Tanika Anderson, was already working with the group as an understudy and puppeteer. Nicholson departed the group in December 2015 to further his performing career and promote his children's book, "Superdudes". He was replaced by Lachie Dearing, who was introduced on tour in January 2016. After being cast in an Australian musical production of Xanadu in January 2016, Melham exited the group, with new member Gabe Brown taking his place in February. He was later succeeded by Chris White.


=== Fourth generation: Attempted television revival ===
The Nine Network announced it was renewing its partnership with the Hi-5 franchise in October 2016 and revealed plans to revive the original television series with a new cast in 2017. As a result, Zheng, Lascaris, Anderson and White had their final performances in December 2016. After auditions were held in November 2016, new members Courtney Clarke, Shay Clifford, Joe Kalou and Bailey Spalding were revealed in December, joining Dearing to form the next generation of the group. The quintet debuted at Carols by Candlelight on Christmas Eve, being Hi-5's first appearance at the Nine event since 2012. The new television series premiered in May 2017 on Nine's multichannel, 9Go!.Additional filming in 2018 was halted, before the Australian production office was closed and the brand was relocated to Singapore. All five members announced their departures and the group adopted temporary touring members for the remainder of 2018. The franchise continued to employ non-permanent performers for touring purposes.


== Musical style ==
Hi-5 has a pop music sound, being described as "a pop group for kids" by Crawford in 2001 and Foley in 2004. Chris Harriott is the primary composer of the group's music, having written and produced thousands of Hi-5 songs (including feature songs of the week and shorter songlets). Graeme-Evans and Harriott had worked together when he scored the theme for the teen drama series, Mirror, Mirror (1995). He had previously worked with Harris as a composer on Bananas in Pyjamas; and had individually worked in Australian theatre. He was originally approached by the creators with the task of writing top ten songs for an age range of 2–6; enabling him to use his experience as a father to write appropriate songs for children. Harriott worked with a group of regular lyricists, including Chris Phillips, Leone Carey and Lisa Hoppe. Robinson stated that members were encouraged to write their own music for the group, and by 2015, said she still receives occasional royalty cheques for her work. Foley has cited the Wiggles as an influence of Hi-5, but noted the respective groups have different musical styles, with Harriott's compositions resembling top 40 rather than nursery rhyme. Original member of the Wiggles and classical musician Phillip Wilcher declared that Hi-5 "successfully explore the essential components that come together to make music"; he detailed how the educational appeal "seems to happen gently and [the group] seem so at one with their audience of young folk... They also seem to know the subtle difference between childlike and childish".


== Educational theory ==

Hi-5, and the related television series, were designed to blend educational aspects with music and movement, while regularly updating music and costumes to remain "abreast of the times". The members are presented as older siblings to the children, rather than appearing as adults who are teaching them. The creators of the television series based it on an underlying educational structure, primarily citing Howard Gardner's theory of multiple intelligences. It is recognised that each child learns in a different way, and each cast member targets a different aspect of learning. Harris observed that most children would identify with the presenter who modelled their preferred learning style. According to the group's website, Hi-5 also incorporates Piaget's theory of cognitive development. The educational theory caters to a wide range of ages, but is primarily targeted at children aged 2–8. Harris intended for the central themes promoted to be universally accessible, as she believed children are essentially the same around the world.The group's musical performances are fast-paced, designed in a way which would replicate the energy of contemporary music videos. Dancing is featured, with a focus on movements that increase the integration between the left and right sides of the brain. The group encourage participation at their live stage shows through interactive elements which the children engage with. Group members have expressed that performances in countries in which English is not the main spoken language are adapted to include more songs and physical elements. Greene stated the group's work is designed for parents to enjoy along with their children.


== Brand and finances ==
The Hi-5 brand was originally owned by its creators, Harris, and Graeme-Evans, under their joint privately owned production company Kids Like Us. Unlike peer entertainers the Wiggles, the cast of Hi-5 did not hold equity, but were rather employees of the brand. Crawford stated, "the money system has to go a long way around before it gets to us." In March 2008, the Nine Network, along with production company Southern Star, purchased the Hi-5 brand. The franchise was placed under the direction of Martin Hersov and Cathy Payne, also Nine and Southern Star executives, while Harris and Graeme-Evans ended their involvement with the company along with the sale.The brand dropped from a net worth of A$18million in 2009 to A$9.7million in 2010. In June 2012, it was announced that the Nine Network, after their financial difficulties, had sold the Hi-5 brand to Asian equity group, Asiasons, through a private fund. The Malaysian-based company's managing director Datuk Jared Lim revealed that they planned to expand the brand throughout Southeast Asia, but expressed that Hi-5's presence in Australia would remain intact. Former series producer Julie Greene became the brand's executive creative director. The Hi-5 brand was consolidated under Tremendous Entertainment Group (TEG) in 2014, after the equity fund was sold.The Nine Network announced it was renewing its partnership with the Hi-5 franchise in October 2016 and revealed plans to revive the television series with a new cast in 2017. However, in September 2018, the Australian production office was closed, with the franchise in its entirety being relocated to Singapore.


=== Philanthropy ===
Hi-5 joined World Vision Australia as ambassadors in 2009, beginning their work in the Philippines while on a promotional tour. The group have since gone on volunteer trips to Cambodia in 2012, and Myanmar in 2015. Hi-5 also became representatives of the Starlight Children's Foundation in 2009, having previously held a history with the foundation. Their work includes regular visits to hospitals while on tour.


=== International versions ===
The Hi-5 franchise launched a series of international versions, with groups touring and producing local adaptations of the television series. In 2002, an American version of Hi-5 was created; the group filmed, recorded albums and toured. A UK group was similarly introduced in 2008 through a television series and tour. After the brand's sale in 2012, there was a return to licensing international groups. In 2014, a Latin American group was created, followed by a local version for the Philippines in 2015, and the introduction of an Indonesian group in 2017.


== Reception ==
Hi-5 experienced success throughout the 2000s with sell-out national tours, charting music albums and awards. The group became known as one of Australia's highest paid entertainment entities, listed in the Business Review Weekly's annual list several times, earning an estimated A$18million in 2009. It has been stated that the band has a teenage and adult following, with dedicated older fans. The group's performance was described by Sally Murphy of Aussiereviews.com as "bright, full of music and catchy tunes," with the original line-up praised by the website's Magdalena Ball for their "consistent camaraderie, [and] varied and well coordinated talent as singers, performers, and dancers." Ball credited their appeal to the members being positive role models. In 2013, Child Magazine's Brooke Tasovac commended "the energy and enthusiasm of new and old cast members", adding that "they all seem to genuinely love what they do".  In 2014, Jo Abi of blog Mamamia praised the group's diversity.Hi-5 was reported as Australia's highest selling children's music property in 2007. The band consistently received album accreditations from ARIA for their releases; Celebrate was accredited as gold, while Jump and Jive with Hi-5, Boom Boom Beat and It's a Hi-5 Christmas went platinum, and It's a Party received double platinum status. Four of the original line-up's albums reached the top 10 on the ARIA Albums Chart, It's a Party (No. 4, July 2000), Boom Boom Beat (No. 3, August 2001), It's a Hi-5 Christmas (No. 4, December 2001) and Hi-5 Hits (No. 10, July 2003).The group's stage show Hi-5 Alive won a Helpmann award for Best Presentation for Children 2002. A sold-out tour of the House Hits show in the Philippines in 2014 led to the group returning for an encore run in 2015. Reviewing the Circus Stageshow in 2008 and speaking of the group's circus skills, Nicole Bittar of The Age reported, "the ever-ebullient television quintet have a promising alternative career if they ever tire of preschool-idol status". The House of Dreams stage show in 2015 received praise from The Daily Telegraph, describing it as a "children's masterpiece in entertainment – slick, funny, and amazingly well-choreographed and performed".The newer line-ups of the group received some criticism. In her blog for The Daily Telegraph in 2011, Sarrah Le Marquand criticised Brant's performance, claiming "for all her sweet enthusiasm, Brant cannot sing a note". She suggested the line-up at the time were "melodically challenged". Deb Pilgrim of Flying Solo argued that the band's content did not reflect the target audience it was tailored for, with complicated choreography and undefined member roles. Reviewing the group's performance at Carols by Candlelight in December 2016, which served as the debut performance of most group members, David Knox of TV Tonight stated "while it wasn’t a memorable first outing, perhaps they will find their place in a setting that showcases their talent". In 2017, Australian Minister for Communications Mitch Fifield jokingly expressed concern about the nature of the group which allows the membership to change over time, suggesting "I think the thing that should most worry parents is the ever-changing ensemble that makes up Hi-5".


== Members ==

Timeline


== Discography ==


== Tours ==


=== Carols by Candlelight ===
In addition to the band's regular tours, Hi-5 performed annually at Vision Australia's Carols by Candlelight in Melbourne, broadcast live by the Nine Network on Christmas Eve. The group would perform a short selection of Christmas songs to entertain the younger viewers of the event, and were joined by Santa Claus, who was played for many years by Terry Gill, and Humphrey B. Bear. It became common for the annual performance to be the final concert of departing members. Hi-5 did not perform at the Carols between 2013 and 2015, and during this time appeared at local Christmas events. Hi-5 returned to Carols by Candlelight in 2016 as part of their reestablished partnership with Nine, but were removed from the line-up in 2018 following the franchise's relocation to Singapore.


== Awards and nominations ==


=== ARIA Awards ===
The Australian Record Industry Association (ARIA) Music Awards are an annual series of awards nights which celebrate the music industry of Australia and have been presented since 1987. In 2004, Hi-5 made history, establishing a record for most consecutive awards in the same category, after winning their fifth ARIA for Hi-5 Holiday.


=== Logie Awards ===
The TV Week Logie Awards are the annual Australian television industry awards. Hi-5 won a total of three Logie Awards for their television series, two for Most Outstanding Children's Program, and one for Most Outstanding Children's Preschool Program (a one-time category).


=== Others ===


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Hi-5 (Australia) on IMDb
HI-5 at the National Film and Sound Archive