Moving the Mountain (Odysseus Surrenders)

The Canyon is the seventh studio album by American rock band The Used. It is a double album. The album was released on October 27, 2017, through Hopeless Records. It is the only studio album to feature guitarist Justin Shekoski since Quinn Allman's departure in 2015. It was highly acclaimed by critics and fans alike and appearing on many best-of-the-year lists, though it only peaked at 50 on the Billboard 200.


== Background and production ==
On February 2, 2015, the band announced that guitarist Quinn Allman be on a temporary leave of absence for a year; Justin Shekoski of Saosin was brought in to fill Allman's role. On November 19, the group officially parted ways with Allman and made Shekoski a full-time member. Following this, the group went on tour to celebrate 15 years of being a band in April and May 2016. Further dates were added extending it into June, before a second leg in August and September was added.The Canyon is the group's first album to feature production from Ross Robinson. Previous albums utilized John Feldmann (with the exception of Artwork, produced by Matt Squire). The album was recorded using analog equipment with no click-tracks or backing vocals to achieve a raw sound. Some of the song titles reference David Foster Wallace, Syria and The Odyssey, among others.


== Release ==
On September 7, 2017, The Canyon was announced for release the following month; alongside this, a music video was released for "Over and Over Again". In October and November, the group went on a headlining US tour with support from Glassjaw. A lyric video was released for "Rise Up Lights" on October 23. The Canyon was released on October 27 through Hopeless Records. A music video was released for "Rise Up Lights" on November 3. In March 2018, Shekoski was removed from the band with them issuing a restraining order against him. He was replaced by Joey Bradford of Hell or Highwater.Following this, the group went on a headlining US tour with support from Red Sun Rising and Fever 333 in April and May. On May 1, a music video was released for "The Nexus". Directed by Lisa Mann, the video is a love story between two "identities battling for supremacy and independence only to be locked in patterned loops together throughout time told through experimental movement." The band then performed on the Warped Tour in June and July. The group were due to go on a European tour in February, but the shows were postponed until August due to a family member dying. Following the tour, the group appeared at the Reading and Leeds Festivals.


== Reception ==
The album appears in AllMusic's 2017 Year In Review: Favorite Punk Albums, Alternative Press's The 40 best albums of 2017 and Drowned in Sound's Album of 2017: Staff edit and Kerrang!'s Albums of 2017 lists.


== Track listing ==
All tracks are written by The Used.


== Live debut of the songs ==


== Personnel ==
The Used

Rob McCracken – Lead vocals, piano (tracks 8&12), solina strings on "The Quiet War"
Justin Shekoski – guitars, backing vocals, banjo, Hammond B-3, harmonica, piano arrangement, programming, solina strings
Jeph Howard – bass guitar
Dan Whitesides – drums, percussionAdditional personnel

Jeph Howard, Rob McCracken, Justin Shekoski, Dan Whitesides, Brittni Whitesides, Erin Balboa, Michael Balboa, Danny Payne and Travis Pavur - group vocals on tracks 4,6&10
Charlene Huang, Nicole Garcia - violins on tracks 1,2,7,8,12,14,17
Hiro Goto - viola and strings arrangements on tracks 1,2,7,8,12,14,17
April Guthrie - cello on tracks 1,2,7,8,12,14,17
Edie Baddicker, Luke Edgemon, Missi Hare - backing vocal ensemble on tracks 2,7,8,11,12,17
Ron Manaog - percussion (all tracks except 1&14)
The Used and Farrah Whitesides - percussion on "Vertigo Cave"
Cleopatra Rose McCracken - vocals on "Moon-Dream"
Michael Lehmann Boddicker - piano and synthesizer production on "Moon-Dream"Production

Ross Robinson – production, mixing
Michael Balboa - engineering
Mike Frase - mixing
Travis Pavur - additional engineering


== Charts ==


== References ==