Hyperdimension Neptunia Mk2

Hyperdimension Neptunia (超次元ゲイム ネプテューヌ, Chōjigen Geimu Neputyūnu, lit. "Super Dimensional Game Neptune") is a video game series of role-playing games created and developed by Idea Factory. The series debuted in Japan on August 19, 2010 with the video game of the same name exclusively for the PlayStation 3, later re-released as an enhanced remake under the name Hyperdimension Neptunia Re;Birth 1 for the PlayStation Vita. Two sequels, Hyperdimension Neptunia mk2 and Hyperdimension Neptunia Victory, in addition to the remake titles for both of them and five spin-offs on the PlayStation Vita, have also been released. Another sequel on the PlayStation 4, titled Megadimension Neptunia VII, was released in 2015. In addition, a remake for that game was released in 2017. Two spin-offs on the PlayStation 4 have been released. It has also branched off into a manga, light novel and anime media franchise series.
An anime television series adaptation, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia: The Animation, aired in Japan between July and September 2013. An OVA, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia The Animation: Nepu no Natsuyasumi premiered on July 8, 2019.


== Setting ==

Games within the series takes place in the world of Gamindustri (ゲイムギョウ界, Geimugyō-kai, a pun on ゲーム業界 Gēmu gyōkai, "game industry"), which is divided into four regions/nations which are each ruled by one CPU: Planeptune, Lastation, Lowee, and Leanbox. Each region is completely different from the others in appearance and atmosphere, with each representing a specific video game console. Lastation represents the PlayStation, Lowee represents the Wii, and Leanbox represents the Xbox, while Planeptune represents the cancelled Sega Neptune. In the beginning of the story, the four goddesses are fighting each other for "shares" in a war known as the Console War. Shares are the manifestation of the belief citizens put into their goddess, and without shares a goddess dies. Because some of the games feature time and/or dimension travel there are slight differences in the settings for each title.


== Development ==
Prior to Q3 2009, Compile Heart was conceptualising a new RPG project centred upon character designs by Tsunako, with the intention of collaborating with a partner company. This game was originally planned to feature three princess sisters and a protagonist. However, the partnership deal fell out, and as a result the project plans were redesigned and eventually became "Neptunia" close to the end of 2009 following the completion of Trinity Universe's development. During the early stages of the project, the characters Noire and Blanc were originally coloured red and blue respectively, however their colour schemes were changed to black and white so that they could better fit in with the new game setting and plot.The release of the first sequel to the original game, Hyperdimension Neptunia mk2, saw the introduction of a reworked game engine and the replacement of various components such as the battle system and dungeons, which were completely rebuilt from scratch. Hyperdimension Neptunia Victory later built on this, with the parts from mk2 which were considered "weak" by the developers removed and improved, eventually setting Victory as the foundation for the design of future titles within the series. Following Compile Heart's collaboration with David Production to produce the Neptunia television animation series, the developers were able to change their approach to direction and script-writing based on their experience with the anime development staff, which resulted in the changes to the narrative found in the Re;Birth games on PlayStation Vita.


== Release history ==
Hyperdimension Neptunia is the first game within the series, with the name originally derived from the scrapped Sega Neptune which combined the Sega Mega Drive/Genesis and Sega 32X into one unit, originally scheduled for release in 1994 or 1995 before the project was dropped after the release of the Sega Saturn.
There are two sequels which have been released under the names Hyperdimension Neptunia Mk2 and Hyperdimension Neptunia Victory. Another game, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia PP (神次元アイドル ネプテューヌPP, Kamijigen Aidoru Neputyūnu PP), was released on June 20, 2013 for the PlayStation Vita in Japan and it was released in the west in June 2014 as Hyperdimension Neptunia: Producing Perfection, developed by Compile Heart, Idea Factory and Tamsoft.
During a streamed interview at Tokyo Game Show 2013, Idea Factory and Compile Heart announced that Hyperdimension Neptunia Re;Birth 2: Sisters Generation was under development,. Re;Birth 2 was released on March 20, 2014. Hyperdevotion Noire: Goddess Black Heart (超女神信仰ノワール　激神ブラックハート, Chō Megami Shinkō Nowāru Geki-Shin Burakkuhāto) with Noire as the main character, was released on May 29, 2014.On March 16, 2014, two new next-generation games were announced, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia U: Action Unleashed (超次元アクション ネプテューヌU) and Megadimension Neptunia VII (新次元ゲイム ネプテューヌVII). Hyperdimension Neptunia U: Action Unleashed is an action game spin-off exclusively for the PlayStation Vita released on August 28, 2014 in Japan, developed by Tamsoft, whilst Megadimension Neptunia VII is a main series title for the PlayStation 4.At Tokyo Game Show 2014, an enhanced remake of Hyperdimension Neptunia Victory for the PlayStation Vita, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia Re;Birth 3: V Century, was announced.


== Games ==


=== Main series ===


=== Spin-offs ===


=== Remakes ===


== Other media ==


=== Manga ===
A manga series based on the game titled Choujigen Game Neptune: Megami Tsuushin (超次元ゲイム ネプテューヌ ~めがみつうしん~) began serialisation in November 2010 within the Famitsu Comic Clear.
A manga series illustrated by Mikage Baku which complements the television animation, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia: The Animation – Hello New World (超次元ゲイム ネプテューヌ THE ANIMATION はろーにゅーわーるど), began serialisation within the June 2013 issue of Dengeki Maoh. A spin-off novel of the anime, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia TGS Hono no Futsukakan, was published by MF Bunko J and released May 25, 2013.


=== Anime ===

An anime adaptation, Hyperdimension Neptunia: The Animation (超次元ゲイム ネプテューヌ THE ANIMATION, Chōjigen Geimu Neputyūnu Ji Animēshon lit. "Super Dimensional Game Neptune THE ANIMATION"), was produced by David Production of Japan and directed by Masahiro Mukai. Series composition and script writing are done by Shogo Yasukawa and a musical score composed by Hiroaki Tsutsumi, Kenji Kaneko and Masaru Yokoyama. Character designs are done by Hitomi Takechi, based on the original designs by Tsunako along with art direction by Masanobu Nomura and sound direction by Jin Aketagawa. The twelve-episode series aired on Tokyo MX on July 12, 2013 and were later aired on BS11, KBS, Sun TV and tvk then finished on September 27, 2013. The series was acquired by Funimation for online streaming in North America with English subtitles. The opening theme is "Dimension tripper!!!!" by Nao and the ending theme is "Neptune☆Sagashite" (ネプテューヌ☆サガして, literally "Looking for☆Neptune") by Afilia Saga. "Go→Love&Peace" by Ayane is used as the ending theme of episodes 3 and 4, in addition to "Ito" (糸, literally "yarn") by Afilia Saga on episode 10. It was broadcast within the United States on Funimation Channel.
A new original video animation titled Nepu no Natsuyasumi was announced to be in production.  Returning staff members include Masahiro Mukai as director,  Hitomi Takechi as character designer, and Shogo Yasukawa as scriptwriter, with animation by studio Okuru to Noboru.   It premiered on July 8, 2019.The anime television series adaptation received a mixed response, with praise for its original story and humor revolving around video game industry in-jokes, and criticism for its use of melodrama.


=== Music ===
Most of the original soundtracks created for the Neptunia series were composed by Kenji Kaneko, with additional composers for Megadimension Neptunia VII and later games. The first, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia Sound Track CD, was released on August 19, 2010, and was bundled with a Japanese Limited Edition of the game. The soundtrack for the second game contained 13 tracks and was released in Japan with the limited edition on August 18, 2011. It was later repackaged with the western limited release on February 28, 2012, which featured 18 tracks and was titled Hyperdimension Neptunia mk2: Sounds of Gamindustri. The soundtrack for Hyperdimension Neptunia Victory was released on August 30, 2012 with the Japanese Limited Edition and contained 16 tracks. Similar to the second game, the soundtrack was released overseas with the Limited Edition of the game with 24 tracks, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia Victory Sounds of that other Gamindustri. The Megadimension VII soundtrack, MEGA DIMENSION NEPTUNE VII Dream Edition DG-ROM, was included with the Japanese Dream Edition and released in a 50 track, 3 disc format on April 23, 2015. Its overseas release, MEGADIMENSION NEPTUNIA VII Official Soundtrack was included exclusively with the Limited Edition online, containing only 45 tracks over 2 discs. Most recently, the soundtrack for 4 Goddesses Online was released on February 9, 2017 with the Royal Edition of the game.For each title in the Re;Birth series, the soundtracks were re-released following each game's initial release, usually with a few additional or missing tracks. Re;Birth 2's soundtrack, titled Hyperdimension Neptunia Re;Birth2: SISTERS GENERATION ~ "Sisters' Melodies" Soundtrack CD was released exclusively on Idea Factory International's website with the Limited Edition of the game and contained 19 tracks from the game. Compile Heart and Idea Factory International later made the Re;Birth series available for the PC on the Steam platform, in which Downloadable content included digital releases of the soundtrack for each game.
In addition to the game soundtracks, there have been CD single releases for the opening and ending themes for each game. The voice actresses for each character have also released individual singles, in which they perform original in-character songs. Various Drama CD series have also been released in which voice actors perform original episodes. The anime series also released singles for the opening and ending themes, alongside a drama CD and 7 special "Animation Processor" discs, which contained a variety of different audio media including songs, voice actor commentary, and drama episodes.
A compilation of the main vocal tracks from each game (including character songs) was released as a 5 disc series on August 27, 2014.


=== Mobile applications and casual games ===
An online mobile card game for Android and iOS titled Neptune Collection (ネプテューヌコレクション) was developed by Idea Factory and hosted by GREE starting from February 15, 2013. It is a collectable card game which involves social networking elements. The game's servers shut down on July 31, 2014.
Alarm clock applications and mobile skins/themes featuring Neptunia characters have also been released for Android and iOS.


== References ==


== External links ==
Hyperdimension Neptunia (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia