Yaakov Yechezkia Greenwald II

Rabbi Yaakov Yehezkiya Greenwald (born April 17, 1948) is an American Rebbe, the current leader of the Pupa Hasidic sect in the United States.


== Biography ==
Born in Antwerp, as the second son of Rabbi Yosef Greenwald, the last rabbi of Pápa before the Holocaust, and his second wife, Miriam. He was circumcised by his father and as a Sandek was honored Rabbi Chaim Meir Yechiel Shapira of Narol. He was named after his Grandfather Rav Yaakov Yechezkiya Greenwald (the "Vayaged Yaakov"). As a child, the family emigrated to the United States where his father founded the Pupa Hasidus.
Married to Bracha Frieda, the daughter of Rabbi Meir Greenwald, Av Beit Din of Tetch, his father-in-law was the cousin of his father, son of Rabbi Avraham Yosef Greenwald and grandson of Rabbi Moshe Greenwald.
For many years he served as Dayan and Posek of the Pupa Hasidism, and since his father's death on August 11, 1984, he serves as the third Admor of Pupa's Hasidim.
Most of his followers live in the United States (mainly New York) and Canada, and a few in Israel and London.
The Rebbe, unlike his chassidim, wears  a Bekishe all week, on weekdays a flat hat (pictured), and on Shabbos a Shtreimel.
Until recently (2017) The Rebbe used to be the Mohel for his followers' newborn sons. Nowadays he serves as Sandek.
Every summer the Pupa Rebbe harvests wheat in Yuma, Arizona to be used in Passover matzah.
In October 2010, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo visited the Pupa Rebbe.


== Descendants ==
Rabbi Meir Greenwald, Dayan in the Pupa Community in Williamsburg, son in law of Reb Leibish Taub of Kaliv OBM
Mrs. Deutch, married to Rabbi Meir Yechiel Mechel Deutch, Rav of congregation Mayanei Hayeshua in Monsey
Rabbi Pincas Chaim Greenwald, Rav of the Pupa Community in Monsey, son in law of the Stroznhitz Rebbe
Mrs. Katz, married to Rabbi Aharon Katz, Rav of Toldos Aharon in Williamsburg
Rabbi Levi Yizchok Greenwald, Rosh HaKollel of the Pupa Kollel in Williamsburg and Dayan (rabbinic judge) in the Boro Park community, son in law of Rabbi Dovid Eichenstein, Burshtiner Rebbe
Mrs. Rubin, married to Rabbi Burech Rubin, son of Rabbi Yaakov Yisroel VeYeshurin Rubin, Sulitza Rebbe of Far Rockaway, Queens
Rabbi Yosef Greenwald, Talmid Chacham, living in Boro Park
Rabbi Moshe Greenwald, Talmid Chacham, living in Boro Park, son in law of Rabbi Naftali Tzvi Weisz, Spinka Rebbe of Boro Park


== References ==


== External links ==
A tag for information about him, on the JDN website
Pupa Rebbe Dancing @ Hachnosas Sefer Torah - YouTube
pupa rebbe RABBI dancing with thousands of followers - YouTube
Pupa Rebbe Dancing On Table Purim 2017 - YouTube
Pupa Rebbe In Monsey - Shevat 5777 - YouTube
Andrew Cuomo visits Pupa Rebbe - YouTube
Photo Essay: Wedding For Grandson Of The Pupa Rebbe (Photos by ...
Chanukah 5772 With Pupa Rebbe - Rebbe Clips - thsiam.com