Jonas Brothers (album)

Jonas Brothers is the self-titled second studio album and the international debut album released by the Jonas Brothers and their first album to be released under Hollywood Records. The album was released on August 7, 2007. "Hold On" was the album's second single, followed by "S.O.S" as the third single, and "When You Look Me in the Eyes" as the fourth single.


== Singles ==
"Year 3000"
A sample of "Year 3000" by Jonas Brothers, serviced as the lead single from Jonas Brothers. Previously released in 2006 by Columbia from the album It's About Time", their hit single "Year 3000" was re-released by Hollywood Records in March 12, 2007. The song peaked at number 31 on Billboard Hot 100 and sold 1,050,000 copies.
"Hold On"
"Hold On" was the official second single from the album Jonas Brothers and was released on May 22, 2007. It was featured in the Disney Channel Original Movie Johnny Kapahala: Back on Board,  and a music video was released to promote the film.
"S.O.S"
"S.O.S" was the third single from Jonas Brothers and was released on August 3, 2007. It was the most successful single from the album, peaking at No. 47 in Australia on the ARIA Singles Chart, No. 49 on the Canadian Hot 100, No. 26 on the Media Control Charts German Singles Chart, No. 14 on the Irish Singles Chart, No. 21 on the Italian Federation of the Italian Music Industry FIMI Singlest 100 Chart, No. 13 on the UK Singles Chart, and No. 19 on the US Billboard Hot 100. It was their first single to chart in Canada, Germany, Ireland, Italy, and the UK. It was their first top-twenty hit in the United States. 
"When You Look Me in the Eyes" was the final single from Jonas Brothers, released on December 28 and produced by John Fields. It was a re-recording of the version that initially appeared on Nick's self-titled solo album. It marked their third chart performance in Australia (No. 46 on the ARIA Singles Chart), their second in Canada and the UK (No. 30 on both the Canadian Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart) , and their fourth in the United States (No. 25 on the Billboard Hot 100Billboard Hot 100, and their third top-40 song).
Other songs
"Kids of the Future" was released as single for the soundtrack to the 2007 animation motion picture Meet the Robinsons and later included in the Jonas Brothers debut album.


== Reception ==
Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described the band,"they're cheerful, good-natured, and, best of all, tuneful," going on to say about the album, "It all adds up an album that's tighter and better than their debut, and one that suggests that they not only deserve their popularity on Radio Disney, but they might have the writing and performing skills to last beyond that as well." Cross Rhythms praised the album saying, "Jonas Brothers have delivered an album that's high-energy pop-punk overflowing with catchy hooks and muscular guitar licks."


== Track listing ==
Bonus Jonas Edition DVD
Jonas Brothers: The Bonus Jonas Edition includes a DVD containing:

Full concert performance at the Blender Theatre at Gramercy"Kids of the Future"
"Just Friends"
"S.O.S"
"Goodnight & Goodbye"
"Hello Beautiful"
"Australia"
"That's Just the Way We Roll"
"Hollywood"
"Inseparable"
"Still in Love with You"
"Hold On"
"Year 3000"Music videos
"S.O.S"
"Hold On"
"Kids of the Future" (Live at the 2007 Disney Channel Games closing ceremony)
"Year 3000"Total running time: approximately 55 minutes
Woolworths exclusive DVD (UK)
An exclusive DVD containing:

Music videos
"S.O.S"
"Hold On"
"When You Look Me in the Eyes"
Band in a Bus trailer
"Jonas Brothers Meet The Queen" - Video from the Jonas Brother's YouTube channel


== Personnel ==
Nick Jonas – lead vocals, rhythm guitar, keyboards, drums on "Australia"
Joe Jonas – lead vocals
Kevin Jonas – lead guitar, background vocals
John Taylor – rhythm and lead guitar, background vocals
John Fields – bass guitar, additional keyboards and guitar
Dorian Crozier – drums, percussion, programming
Stephen Lu – string arrangements, conducting


== Charts ==


== Release history ==


== References ==


== External links ==
CDVU+ Interview Video on YouTube