Title: Peromyscus
Aspects: {'P. californicus'}

Peromyscus is a genus of rodents whose members are commonly referred to as deer mice. They are New World mice only distantly related to the common house and laboratory mouse, Mus musculus. From this relative, Peromyscus species are distinguished by relatively larger eyes, and also often two-tone coloring, with darker colors over the dorsum (back), and white abdominal and limb hair-coloring. In reference to the coloring, the word Peromyscus comes from Greek words meaning "booted mouse". They are also accomplished jumpers and runners by comparison to house mice, and their common name of "deer mouse" (coined in 1833) is in reference to this agility.The most common species of deer mice in the continental United States are two closely related species, P. maniculatus, and P. leucopus. In the United States, Peromyscus is the most populous mammalian genus overall, and has become notorious in the western United States as a carrier of hantaviruses.


== Reservoir of human disease ==


=== Hantavirus ===
The deer mouse came to the attention of the public when it was discovered to be the primary reservoir species for Sin Nombre hantavirus.


=== Lyme disease ===
A recent study in British Columbia of 218 deer mice showed 30% (66) were seropositive for Borrelia burgdorferi, the agent of Lyme disease.


=== Other diseases ===
Ehrlichiosis and babesiosis are also carried by the deer mouse.


== Use as a laboratory animal ==
While wild populations are sometimes studied, Peromyscus species are also easy to breed and keep in captivity, although they are more energetic and difficult to handle than the relatively more tame M. musculus. For certain studies, They are also favored over the common laboratory mouse (M. musculus) and the laboratory rat (Rattus norvegicus).  Apart from their importance in studying infectious diseases, Peromyscus species are useful for studying phylogeography, speciation, chromosomes, genetics, ecology, population genetics, and evolution in general.  They are also useful for researching repetitive-movement disorders. Their use in aging research is because Peromyscus spp., despite being of similar size to the standard laboratory mouse, have maximum lifespans of 5-7 years, compared to the 3-year maximum lifespan of ad libitum-fed laboratory strains or wild-caught M. musculus.The Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center at the University of South Carolina was established by Professor Wallace Dawson in 1985 to raise animals of the peromyscine species for research and educational use. This institute maintains populations of several different species (including Peromyscus californicus, Peromyscus maniculatus, Peromyscus melanophrys, Peromyscus eremicus, and Peromyscus aztecus). A variety of mutations affecting their behavior, biochemistry, and the color of their coats is exhibited in these genetic lines.


== Species ==
Peromyscus
californicus group
California mouse – P. californicus
eremicus group
Cactus mouse – P. eremicus
Angel Island mouse – P. guardia – possibly extinct
P. g. guardia – last seen 1991
P. g. mejiae – extinct (1973)
P. g. harbisoni – extinct (1963)
P. guardia subsp. indet. from Estanque Island – extinct (1998)
San Lorenzo mouse – P. interparietalis
Northern Baja deer mouse– P. fraterculus
Dickey's deer mouse – P. dickeyi
False canyon mouse – P. pseudocrinitus
Eva's desert mouse – P. eva
Burt's deer mouse– P. caniceps
Mesquite mouse – P. merriami
Pemberton's deer mouse – P. pembertoni – extinct (1931)
hooperi group
Hooper's mouse – P. hooperi
crinitus group
Canyon mouse – P. crinitus
maniculatus group
North American deer mouse − P. maniculatus
Oldfield mouse or beach mouse – P. polionotus
P. p. allophrys
P. p. ammobates
Pallid beach mouse P. p. decoloratus – extinct (1959)
P. p. leucocephalus
P. p. niveiventris
P. p. peninsularis
Anastasia Island beach mouse P. p. phasma
P. p. trissyllepsis
Santa Cruz mouse – P. sejugis
Northwestern deer mouse – P. keeni
Northwestern deer mouse or Keen's mouse – P. sitkensis
Black-eared mouse– P. melanotis
Slevins's mouse or Catalina deer mouse – P. slevini
†Giant island deer mouse – P. nesodytes – extinct
leucopus group
White-footed mouse– P. leucopus
Cotton mouse– P. gossypinus
Key Largo cotton mouse P. g. allapaticola
†Chadwick Beach cotton mouse P. g. restrictus – extinct (1938)
aztecus group
Aztec mouse – P. aztecus
Gleaning mouse – P. spicilegus
Winkelmann's mouse – P. winkelmanni
boylii group
Brush mouse – P. boylii
Nimble-footed mouse – P. levipes
Schmidly's deer mouse – P. schmidlyi
San Esteban Island mouse – P. stephani
Texas mouse – P. attwateri
Nayarit mouse – P. simulus
Tres Marias island mouse – P. madrensis
White-ankled mouse – P. pectoralis
Chihuahuan mouse – P. polius
truei group
Perote mouse – P. bullatus
Zacatecan deermouse, or southern rock deermouse – P. difficilis
Osgood's mouse – P. gratus
Northern rock mouse – P. nasutus
Pinyon mouse – P. truei
melanophrys group
Plateau mouse – P. melanophrys
Pueblo deer mouse – P. mekisturus
Tawny deer mouse – P. perfulvus
furvus group
Blackish deer mouse – P. furvus
Maya mouse – P. mayensis
El Carrizo deer mouse – P. ochraventer
megalops group
Brown deer mouse – P. megalops
Zempoaltepec – P. melanocarpus
Black-tailed mouse – P. melanurus
mexicanus group
Gardner's deer mouse - P. gardneri
Big deer mouse – P. grandis
Guatemalan deer mouse – P. guatemalensis
Naked-eared deer mouse – P. gymnotis
Mexican deer mouse – P. mexicanus
Stirton's deer mouse – P. stirtoni
Yucatán deer mouse – P. yucatanicus
Chiapan deer mouse – P. zarhynchus
Transvolcanic deer mouse – P. hylocetes


== References ==


== External links ==
The song of the deer mouse
Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center (University of South Carolina)
Deer Mice Fact Sheet from the National Pest Management Association — with information on habits, habitat and health threats.
Hantavirus Fact Sheet
Peromyscus photos