Title: P. J. Thomas, Parackanal
Aspects: {'P. J. Thomas'}

Painnumoottil John Thomas (April 15, 1914 – March 24, 1998) was an Indian pastor.
Thomas's father was P. V. John (Ayyapilla Sir)came to know the Lord through a native missionary (Kappiar Upadesi)who taught him John 3:16. The love of a living God so compelled his young mind that he left his Hindu Brahmin background. He married Sossamma and they had five boys(John, Daniel, Thomas, Jacob, George) and one girl(Leelaamma). P J Thomas is the third oldest among the siblings.
Pastor Thomas attended Serampore University and earned a Diploma in Theology. He became the principal of the IPC free School. Following his marriage to Aleyamma from Keezhvaipur, Mallappally, he left for Australia for higher studies. He went to England from Australia and to the U.S, where he attended Wheaton College (Illinois) and got a Master's degree in Comparative Religion. He taught at Wheaton for a short time before returning to India in 1952. Before he went back to India, he was instrumental in bringing the then three senior Indian Pentecostal Church pastors, Pastor K.E. Abraham, K.C. Cherian, and P.M. Samuel to the U.S. He also traveled with Pastor K.E. Abraham and interpreted for him across the U.S.
Following his return to India, the late Pastor J. Varghese (Kochusir) Persuaded him to settle down at Tiruvalla. Pastor and Mrs. Thomas  purchased the present Sharon property in March 1953 and made it their home. The fame of "Sharon" came with two revival meetings and the opening of the Bible College at Sharon compound. On Nov. 30, 1953 missionaries arrived who conducted 30 days of revival and healing ministry, the last week's attendance was over 100,000 a night. These meeting were conducted without any foreign donation, only from the free will offering of the people who attended. Hundreds turned to the Lord and were baptized. Many were healed of their illnesses. Rev. John E.Douglas and Rev R. W. Schambach who were instrumental for this meetings. With the completion of the Sharon Hall, Sharon Bible College was born in 1955 where several pastors have been trained.
Unfortunately the 1950s were a period of unrest within the Indian Pentecostal Church. During the split in Indian Pentecostal Church, the Sharon Hall was often used as a place of mediation, but Pastor Thomas remained neutral. Several independent churches approached Pastor Thomas to help them with building churches and buying burial grounds and to give them a hand in common fellowship. As a result Pastor Thomas decided to remain independent. Although it had a small beginning the church began to grow in leaps and bounds beginning the mid sixties, he called it a fellowship of churches thus it is called Sharon Fellowship Churches of India, but commonly called as Sharon Church.
Pastor Thomas was a man of God with a vision, faith, honesty, humility, integrity and compassion. He was a prophet for the modern day with practicing theology.


== See also ==
History of Pentecostalism in India
Critique of Pentecostal Mission
New Christian movements in India


== References ==


== External links ==
Trumpet Magazine
P.C.N.A.K. About Us
IPC GENERAL COUNCIL
MGMMINISTRIES
The Keralite Pentecostal Community: The Past and the Present
India Pentecostal Church of God
Christianity in India
History of FGIC
Suvartha Magazine
Funeral of P.J. Thomas
Pentecostal Communities