Title: Al-Anʻām
Aspects: {'Q6'}

Al-Anʻām (Arabic: الأنعام‎, "The Cattle") is the sixth chapter (sūrah) of the Qur'an, with 165 verses (āyāt). Its main topics are monotheism, resurrection, heaven and hell. Regarding the timing and contextual background of the supposed revelation (Asbāb al-nuzūl), it is a "Meccan surah", which means it is believed to have been revealed in  Mecca, instead of  Medina.
The surah reports the story of the prophet Abraham,[Quran 6:74–80] who, by using his own reason, calls others to stop worshiping celestial bodies and turns towards Allah so that he could receive revelation.
It includes a version of the Mosaic Ten Commandments.


== Notable verses ==
6:32 - warns against hedonism:"What is the life of this world but play and amusement? But best is the home in the hereafter, for those who are righteous."6:59 - teaches that none but Allah is Omniscient:"And with Him are the keys of the Invisible. None but He Knoweth them. And He Knoweth what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf falleth but He Knoweth it, not a grain amid the darkness of the earth, naught of wet or dry but (it is noted) in a clear record."6:68 - commands avoiding talking to disbelievers about revelation:"And when thou seest those who meddle with Our revelations, withdraw from them until they meddle with another topic. And if the devil cause thee to forget, sit not, after the remembrance, with the congregation of wrong-doers."6:73 - teaches about Allah's Omnipotence:"In the day when He Saith: Be! it is."6:151 - Mildly resembles parts of The Ten Commandments


== Transliteration ==
Verse (6:159) is famously known for forbidding sects and denominations.As for those who divide their religion and break up into sects, thou hast no part in them in the least: their affair is with Allah: He will in the end tell them the truth of all that they did.
Inna allatheena farraqoo deenahum wakanoo shi'a an lasta minhum fee shay, in innama amruhum ila Allah thumma yunabbi-ohum bima kanoo yaf 'aloon.


== References ==


== External links ==
Surah Al-An'am Mp3