Title: San Martin Airport
Aspects: {'Q99'}

San Martin Airport (formerly South County Airport of Santa Clara County, colloquially South County Airport) (FAA LID: E16) — formerly Q99 — is a public non-towered airport located one mile (1.6 km) east of San Martin, serving Santa Clara County, California, U.S.A. This general aviation airport covers 179 acres (72 ha) and has one runway.  A self-service fueling facility offers 100LL aviation gasoline continuously.  Jet-A fuel is available from a full-service truck during FBO operating hours, and major airframe and powerplant service are available. Magnum Aviation is the fixed-base operator (FBO) at South County, serving aviation fuels.
Although still distinctly visible from the air and shown on some maps, taxiway "F", adjacent to the U.S. Route 101 fence, has been abandoned and decommissioned since about 2000.
The Wings of History Air Museum is located adjacent to the airport.


== Instrument approaches and departures ==
San Martin Airport has one instrument approach procedure approved and published by the Federal Aviation Administration. The RNAV (GPS) RWY 32 approach is documented for normal and circling approaches using RNAV or GPS guidance with 1200' MDA and 1 1/4 mile visibility minimums. The RNAV (GPS) RWY 32 approach is not approved for use at night. The airport is equipped with pilot-controlled lighting.
There are no Standard Instrument Departure (SID) procedures published for the San Martin Airport.
Takeoff minimum visibility is standard at 1 mile for climb in instrument conditions, or alternately a ceiling of 1700 feet and 2.5 miles visibility for climb in visual conditions while operating under an instrument flight plan and clearance.


== Name change ==
In late 2013 County of Santa Clara staff recommended that the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors rename South County Airport to "San Martin Airport". This recommendation was approved by the County Airports Commission on 1 October 2013 and referred to the Board of Supervisors for final approval. The board of supervisors subsequently unanimously approved the proposal on 28 January 2014, making its proposed name official.


== See also ==

Palo Alto Airport
Reid–Hillview Airport
List of airports in the San Francisco Bay Area


== References ==


== External links ==
FAA Airport Master Record for E16 (Form 5010 PDF)
Santa Clara County Airports, a division of the County Roads and Airports Department
Santa Clara County Airports division E16-specific page
South County Airport Pilots Association
Resources for this airport:
FAA airport information for E16
AirNav airport information for E16
FlightAware airport information and live flight tracker
SkyVector aeronautical chart for E16