Title: KCQQ
Aspects: {'Q106'}

KCQQ is an FM radio station licensed to Davenport, Iowa with a classic rock format. The station's frequency is 106.5 MHz, and broadcasts at a power of 100 kW, with transmitter located in rural LeClaire in Scott County.
KCQQ (commonly known as "Q-106" & "Q106.5") is owned by iHeartMedia, Inc., with studios located in Davenport. Other stations located in the same complex are KMXG, KUUL, WLLR-FM, WFXN and WOC. 
KCQQ is not licensed to broadcast in the HD Radio (digital) format.


== History ==
When the Quad Cities' allocation for 106.5 FM first signed on-the-air in 1966, it was home to the market's first FM country music station. The station was known as KWNT-FM, and for the most part was simply the FM repeater for KWNT's AM signal (at 1580 kHz). KWNT-AM was a daytime station and was required to sign-off the air at sunset. KWNT-FM briefly had its own talk show after the AM station had signed off for the day. Also, shortly before becoming KRVR, KWNT-FM featured album rock music. It was the first commercial station in the Quad Cities market to do so.
The station continued its country format until the summer 1973, when 106.5 FM was switched to an easy listening/adult contemporary format as KRVR-FM; KWNT-AM continued with the country format for several more years. Fondly known to locals under its slogan "K-River," KRVR continued on with few changes until 1995, when it switched to a classic hits format, eventually tweaking to classic rock, as KCQQ, "Q-106.5".
From September 1995 through December 31, 2006, KCQQ was the home of the top rated local morning duo Dwyer and Michaels.  At the beginning of 2007, it was announced that the two hosts would return to rival station WXLP in July, where they previous had hosted a morning show.  Clear Channel sued Dwyer and Michaels alleging that they had violated a non-compete clause in their contract.  The judge ruled in favor of the duo.
Since January 2007, KCQQ has featured the nationally syndicated The Bob & Tom Show.
Like what WXLP did in late 2014 to early 2015, KCQQ began to add in a few newer tracks to its playlist and also some tracks one would not typically find on a classic rock station. The "new" artists mixed in to the classic rock playlist include Foo Fighters, Lenny Kravitz late 1990s material (along with "Are You Gonna Go My Way"), Smashing Pumpkins "1979", the Offspring's "Self Esteem", "Lightning Crashes" by Live, and even "Seven Nation Army" by the White Stripes, and "Epic" by Faith No More.


== References ==


== External links ==
KCQQ's website
Query the FCC's FM station database for KCQQ
Radio-Locator information on KCQQ
Query Nielsen Audio's FM station database for KCQQ