Title: Flight training
Aspects: {'QAC'}

Flight training is a course of study used when learning to pilot an aircraft. The overall purpose of primary and intermediate flight training is the acquisition and honing of basic airmanship skills.Flight training can be conducted under a structured accredited syllabus with a flight instructor at a flight school or as private lessons with no syllabus with a flight instructor as long as all experience requirements for the desired pilot certificate/license are met.
Typically flight training consists of a combination of two parts: 

Flight Lessons given in the aircraft or in a certified Flight Training Device
Ground School primarily given as a classroom lecture or lesson by a flight instructor where aeronautical theory is learned in preparation for the student's written, oral, and flight pilot certification/licensing examinations.Although there are various types of aircraft, many of the principles of piloting them have common techniques, especially those aircraft which are heavier-than-air types.Flight schools commonly rent aircraft to students and licensed pilots at an hourly rate. Typically the hourly rate is determined by the aircraft's Hobbs meter or Tach timer therefore the costumer is only charged while the aircraft engine is running. Flight instructors can also be scheduled with or without an aircraft for pilot proficiency and recurring training.The oldest flight training school still in existence is the Royal Air Force's (RAF's) Central Flying School formed in May 1912 at Upavon, United Kingdom. The oldest civil flight school still active in the world is based in Germany at the Wasserkuppe. It was founded as "Mertens Fliegerschule" and is currently named, "Fliegerschule Wasserkuppe".


== Type conversion ==

A type conversion, commonly known throughout Australia and Europe as an endorsement, or in the United States as a "type rating", is the process undertaken by a pilot to update their license to allow them to fly a different type of aircraft.


== See also ==
Bárány chair
Bachelor of Aviation
Integrated pilot training
Pilot certification in the United States
Pilot licensing in Canada
Pilot licensing in the United Kingdom


== References ==


== External links ==
Learning to Fly: A Practical Manual for Beginners (1916) by Claude Grahame-White and Harry Harper
Student Pilot Guide from the FAA
Accelerated Flight Training from Flying Mag.
Pilot Training Compass: Back to the Future from European Cockpit Association.