Title: Scania PRT-range
Aspects: {'R series'}

The Scania PRT-range (also known as Scania LPGRS-range or Scania PGRT-range), also referred to as new truck range or Scania's truck range, is the current range of trucks produced by the Swedish commercial vehicle manufacturer Scania. It was first introduced as the successor to the 4-series in spring 2004 with the high forward control cab Scania R-series, followed by the low forward control cab Scania P-series and bonneted cab Scania T-series later in the year. In 2005, the T-series was dropped from the lineup, and in 2007 the medium forward control cab Scania G-series was introduced. The entire range is modular, giving a wide range of different configurations for different types of trucks. The trucks are available with engines ranging from a 9-litre I5 to a 16-litre V8, with the V8 only being available in the R-series (and formerly T-series). A second generation launched in August 2016, first was the Scania S-series being the first flat-floor model. In December 2017, a low-end version of the second generation, the Scania L-series, also launched.


== First generation (2004–2018) ==
The range was first launched with the R-series on 31 March 2004, replacing the R94, R114, R124 and R164 of the 4-series. It had 65 percent of the same components as its predecessors, but with a new cab design, new interior and other technical improvements. Full-scale production started in Södertälje (Sweden) in April, Zwolle (the Netherlands) in May and in Angers (France) in June. At launch it was available with Euro III engines, but with a 420 hp Euro IV engine available from September. On 20 August, the P- and T-series were launched too, completing the new truck range and replacing the rest of the 4-series models. The new models made their public debut at the IAA commercial vehicle show in Hanover in late September. Production of the 4-series was continued at the Scania Latin America plant in São Bernardo do Campo (Brazil), but was from October 2004 relaunched as the Série Evolução (Evolution Series), featuring the new engines of the PRT-range and the same new model designation, but with the old 4-series cabs.In October 2005, Scania decided to discontinue the bonneted T-series, having lost its market share over the years. Over the last decade the sales had been halved in Europe and gone down 90 percent in Latin America. In 2004, fewer than 1,000 bonneted Scania trucks were sold worldwide, meaning there was no longer a market for it. In late 2006, Scania launched a new low-entry version of the P-series cab, known as the CP19E, specially intended for garbage trucks, where the driver needs to get in and out quickly. This cab was targeted as a competitor to the Mercedes-Benz Econic.
On 5 September 2007, Scania launched the all-new G-series, with a cab height between the P-series and the R-series. It should not be confused with the old G cab of the 2- and 3-series, which was even lower than the P cab, nor with the G chassis of the 4-series (i.e. 94G). On 9 October 2007, the new range was also launched in Latin America, featuring all three P-, G- and R-series from the start. In April 2008, Scania unveiled their first ethanol-powered (ED95) trucks, having manufactured ethanol-powered buses for nearly two decades.On 17 September 2009, an upgraded R-series was launched with many new features including a sharper exterior styling with larger grille openings, new interior details including the possibility of a factory-installed coffeemaker, new version of the Scania Opticruise gear system with automatic clutch and a driver support system. The G-series received the upgrade shortly afterwards, and the P-series during 2011.
In April 2010, Scania launched a new version of its V8 engine, allowing a maximum output of 730 hp and 3500 N·m in trucks, and preparing for the future Euro VI emission requirements. The new R 730 then became the most powerful large-scale production truck in the world, only to be surpassed by the Volvo FH16 750 (750 hp, 3550 N·m) in September 2011.


== Second generation (2016–present) ==

		
		
		
		
Since Scania signed a deal with Porsche Engineering in August 2010, a completely new truck cab has been in development. From early 2014, several masked prototypes have been spotted on roads in Sweden, Spain and Norway. The next generation of trucks from Scania was launched at the Grand Palais in Paris on 23 August 2016. The launch included new R-series sleeper cab and the all-new S-series sleeper cab which offers a flat interior floor. Other cab heights, including R-series day cab, of the new generation will have a later launch. The first display of the new generation to a public audience occurred at the Elmia Lastbil fair in Jönköping on 24 August.The low-end version called the L series was added to the lineup in December 2017.


=== Scania XT ===
Introduced in September 2017, the Scania XT-range is the first independently tailor-made construction model. It features a rugged styling and an all-new heavy duty bumper which extends 150 millimetres from the front of the cab with an improved approach angle and reinforced ribbed rear view mirrors instead of standard ones. It is distinguished by one-piece bumper, headlight protection, robust mirror casings and a high air intake. Both features provide additional operational durability and combine to give a distinct and rugged visual identity. The bumper also incorporates an easily accessible towing device located behind the foldable registration plate holder. It is certified for 40 tonnes, enabling the vehicle to pull other vehicles and equipment as well as to be towed when needed.  Other features include slip proof steps, XT branded seats and high-edge rubber mats, and to further set the XT range apart a number of exterior and interior options.
XT models are available with a variety of options to improve safety and efficiency. EBS with discs or drums, new two-leaf parabolic front springs and enlarged wheel housings to accommodate larger than normal wheel/tyre combinations, can be specified together with two different vertical exhaust stack options.
Its progressive application means it will automatically activate at low speed when the driver's safety belt is undone or the door is opened.
In conjunction with the electronic parking brake, hill hold has been enhanced by the removal of a time limit for its activation, and automatic re-application in stop-start traffic queues.
Engines and Transmissions shared with the same new generation has been available.


=== Engines ===
New diesel engines currently available in selected truck models as of December 2017. A liquefied natural gas (LNG) was added into the lineup in late 2017.


== Model designation ==
Scania use different model designations for different contexts. A simplified truck model designation is used for marketing and is visible in the grille. Another complete designation defines the characteristics of the chassis and the drivetrain, and a third designation defines the cab configuration.


=== Truck model ===
The simplified truck model name consists of the cab type and power code, divided by a space. Examples: R 730, G 440, P 270.


=== Complete vehicle ===
Cab typeL: Low-end forward control cab
P: Low forward control cab
G: Medium forward control cab
R: High forward control cab
T: Bonneted cab
S: Highest forward control cab with flat floorPower codeApproximation of the power rating in hp to the nearest ten. The power code has spaces on both sides.

Type of transportL: Long-distance haulage
D: Distribution
C: ConstructionChassis adaptionA: Tractor unit (Articulated)
B: Truck bodywork (Basic)Wheel configuration4x2: two-axle
4x4: two-axle, all-wheel drive
6x2: tri-axle, rigid tag axle
6x2/2: tri-axle, rigid pusher axle
6x2/4: tri-axle, steered pusher axle
6x2*4: tri-axle, steered tag axle
6x4: tri-axle, double drive axle
6x6: tri-axle, all-wheel drive
8x2: four-axle, double front axle, rigid tag axle
8x2/4: four-axle, steered pusher axle, rigid tag axle
8x2*6: four-axle, double front axle, steered tag axle
8x4: four-axle, double front axle, double drive axle
8x4*4: four-axle, double drive axle, steered tag axle
8x8: four-axle, all-wheel driveDuty classM: Medium duty, for transport on even surfaces
H: Heavy duty, for transport on uneven surfaces
E: Extra heavy duty, for off-road transportChassis heightE: Extra low
L: Low
N: Normal
S: Semi high
H: HighSuspensionA: leaf-spring suspension front and air suspension rear
B: air suspension front and rear
Z: leaf-spring suspension front and rearExamples:

P 230 DB4x2MNA: Low forward control cab, 230 hp, distribution truck
R 730 CA8x8EHZ: High forward control cab, 730 hp, four-axle all-wheel drive, off-road tractor unit
S 500 LB6x4HNB: High, flat-floor control cab, 500 hp, tri-axle RWD for two axles, long-distance transport unit


=== Cab ===
Cab typeThe cab type consists of C and the corresponding letter for the main cab type; CP, CG, CR and CT.

Cab lengthInterior distance between front and rear walls, measured in decimetres.

14: Short cab
16: Day cab
19: Sleeper cab
28: CrewCab (5−6 persons)
31: Long CrewCab (6−8 persons)
32: Extended sleeper cabRoof heightN: Normal
L: Low
E: Low boarding step, normal roof height (Low entry)
H: High (Scania Highline)
T: Full height (Scania Topline)Examples:

CP19E: Low entry cab, for garbage trucks
CP31: Long crew cab, for fire engines
CR19H: High-entry sleeper cab, for long-distance haulage trucks


== References ==


== External links ==
Trucks Scania AB