Title: MTR Hyundai Rotem EMU
Aspects: {'R Train'}

The Hyundai Rotem EMU (also known as R-Train or 1141B) is an upcoming model of heavy rail electric multiple units to be used on the Mass Transit Railway in Hong Kong. The 9-car sets are manufactured by Hyundai Rotem for the future North South Corridor, an extension of the East Rail Line, at a cost of HK$4 billion. 37 trainsets were ordered in December 2012 and the first delivery took place in 2015. All trainsets will in service by 2020 in time for the opening of the Sha Tin to Central Link, by which time all Metro Cammell EMUs will be retired and SP1900 EMUs withdrawn and reassigned to the East West Corridor.


== Formation ==
The formation ranges from D001/D003 (Trainset 1) to D109/D111 (Trainset 37). One car will still be reserved for the first class in each train set. The 9-car formation is shorter than the existing 12-car East Rail Line train. There are concerns that the new formation may worsen the existing overcrowding problem. However, the Transport and Housing Bureau and MTRC suggest that the new signaling system and higher train speeds will increase the train frequency from three minutes down to two minutes. Also, after the completion of the Sha Tin to Central Link (Tai Wai – Hung Hom section) in 2019, 20% of the existing East Rail line passengers will take the new East West Corridor.


== Design and features ==

The Hyundai Rotem EMU train will be more advanced than the existing trains.

The exterior of these trains is similar to that of the C-trains, including the presence of emergency exits, the first new trains on the ex-KCR network to be so equipped (though such doorways existed on the pre-refurbished Metro Cammell trains). They are painted in the same livery as those operating on the South Island line. The cab ends, though, show some small differences, including a slightly angled front end and modified headlight cluster.
Train doors on this stock are more evenly distributed, similar to pre-merger MTR trains. This is especially noticeable in the first class compartment, where the doors are painted yellow to distinguish from standard class. The location of the doors in the first class compartment allow both to be used for normal boarding, which is not possible using the offset arrangement of previous sets.
Seats near gangway connections are placed horizontally, making room for standing space. The new signaling system will also be compatible with future automatic platform gates on the North-South Corridor.
Train compartment will be wider than existing trains, increasing capacity.
All lighting will use LEDs instead of incandescent lighting.
27-inch LCD display screen is installed for MTR in-train TV
Dynamic route maps and improved grab poles
"Rugby-like" grab pole


== Train configurations ==


== References ==