Title: Ram Sewak Sharma
Aspects: {'R.S. Sharma'}

Ram Sewak Sharma (born 1955) is an Indian bureaucrat. Currently, he is the Chairman of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI), the only one in the organisation's history to be reappointed to the post.  Prior to this assignment, he swore as the Secretary, 
Department of Electronics and Information Technology (under Ministry of Communications and Information Technology, Government of India). He belongs to the 1978 batch of the Indian Administrative Service.


== Early life ==
Born in a small village of Uttar Pradesh, he completed his early education from schools near his village. He, thereafter joined University of Allahabad where he completed his bachelor of Science (BSc) in 1974. In 1976, he completed his masters in Mathematics from IIT, Kanpur. Later, in 2000, he left and went for study, doing his Masters in Computer Science from University of California, Riverside.


== Career ==
Ram Sewak Sharma joined the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) in 1978. In 1986, he wrote a program in DBASE, a programming language that would keep a record of all stolen firearms in the crime-prone district. As soon as a firearm would be found, the programme would run a search query among thousands of age-old records. Together, they impressed the state government, by solving 22 cases in just 30 days.Sharma has held posts in six state departments in the past seven years. He was transferred nine times in a span of six years in Jharkhand.In July 2018, as an attempt to spread awareness about the privacy of Aadhaar database, he published his UID number in a tweet on social media platform - Twitter. Within hours of publishing this information, information security researchers were able to identify his Voter ID, PAN Number, UPI address, home address, e-mail address and phone numbers. But there was no evidence of identified information hacked from Aadhaar database through his published aadhaar number or not. This led to increased criticism about the safety of Aadhaar number. The online community refused to cite Aadhaar database as secure as no proof was provided that the information had not been retrieved using the Aadhaar number.As the TRAI chairman, his goal to gradually reduce Interconnect Usage Charges has earned him much acclaim from some and criticism from others. Critics allege that the decision is biased towards Jio while those defending TRAI claim that reducing these charges was necessary for the continuous growth of the sector.


== Awards ==
Prime Minister’s Award for Excellence in Public Administration - 2008


== Positions ==
Chairman, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.
Secretary, D/o Electronics and Information Technology,M/o Communications & Info Tech, Govt of India.
Chief Secretary, Government of Jharkhand
Director General, UIDAI (2009–2013)
Jharkhand’s Principal Secretary (Public Health and Engineering)
Secretary IT, Human Resource Development, Panchayati Raj, Personnel and Drinking Water & Sanitation.
Principal Secretary to the Governor from 1 January 2003 to 11 June 2003.
Deputy Development Commissioner in Saharsa
District Collector in Begusarai, Purnea and Dhanbad
Joint Secretary in the Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance
Nodal Officer for the IMF, MIGA and GEF.


== References ==