Title: Right 2 Dream Too
Aspects: {'R2D2 (disambiguation)'}

Right 2 Dream Too (known to locals as R2D2) is a homeless encampment in Portland, Oregon incorporated as a nonprofit organization In its beginning, it has setup an unauthorized transient camp on private property in October, 2011 in Old Town Chinatown at Northwest 4th Avenue and West Burnside St near downtown, Portland. It had permission from the property owner, but it was not authorized by the city. The encampment operates under its parent company Right 2 Survive. Its operation erected tents and built a fence without necessary permits and it was assessed fines for doing so. In April 2017, the city agreed to allow its organized transient camp to move to a land owned by the Portland Bureau of Transportation and stay for up to two years. Its camp remained at the original location for over five years before moving to a temporary site in North Portland on N Thunderbird Ave in July 2017.Its lease on this site will expire in April 2019.


== Camp organization ==

Code of conduct reads drug and weapon free zone as cited by OPB in February 2016. Full time lodging is given only to members. Membership subject to approval process by existing members. Non-members sleep on the floor and are restricted to 12 hours per 24 hour period, as of June 2017.The camp has a 24-hour security desk at its entrance, which is manned by camp residents. Sleeping bags used by the camp's populace are laundered weekly.


== Location ==
The encampment began at the original location in 2011. Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association objected to its presence next to the Chinatown Gate. In addition, the Portland Business Alliance sent a letter to city officials asking for removal or relocation of Right 2 Dream Too around December 2012. In 2013, the encampment and Portland city officials developed tentative plans to move the homeless camp to a city-owned parking lot under the Broadway Bridge in Portland's Pearl District. Additional locations for the camp's relocation have also been considered by the organization and city officials. Business and neighborhood leaders in the Pearl District have fought in opposition against the proposed Pearl District move. Complaints about its transient campsite to the city's Bureau of Development Services dried up and dropped to just one in a 12 months period by February 2015. Commissioner Dan Saltzman gave his opinion that "People that are concerned about their presence have given up," "They've given up on us [city leaders]. I think that has a lot to do with it."In 2015, the city considered moving the encampment to a lot next to a metal finishing business that has been in business at the same location for 72 years and has been using the lot in question with permission for a long period. The proposal was blocked by a state land use board and the move did not materialize. The long standing metal finishing business sued the city for $9.9 million in 2018 alleging breach of agreement over the ordeal. A warehouse in Northwest Portland and a location in the industrial area of the central east side were considered as well, but did not materialize due to cost and neighborhood oppositions. In the site selection process, a developer pledged $800,000 to keep the campsite out of the Pearl District.Its most recent encampment is located at its temporary site at 999 N Thunderbird near the Moda Center.  Its permission to use the current site will expire in April 2019.


== See also ==

List of tent cities in the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
Right 2 Dream Too on Blogger
Right 2 Survive