Title: R59 (South Africa)
Aspects: {'R59'}

The R59 is a provincial route in South Africa that connects Hertzogville with Alberton (south-east of Johannesburg) via Parys and Vereeniging. The R59 is a freeway from the Alberton Reading Interchange until just after the R57 Junction in Sasolburg.


== Route ==


=== Free State ===
The R59 begins at a t-junction with the R64 west of Dealesville. It heads north to the town of Hertzogville where it meets the R708 at a t-junction next to the Palmietpan and they become co-signed northwards. North of the town the R59 turns right and becomes its own road north-east to Hoopstad where on the southerly outskirts, before the Vet River, it t-junctions with the R700 and turns northwards.
It crosses the Vet River into Hoopstad where it meets and becomes cosigned with the R34. They loop to the north of the town and turn east before the R59 becomes its own road to resume its journey north-east and eventually crosses the R505 before Bothaville. The route continues past a place named Misgunst to enter Bothaville, where it meets the R30 and co-signs with it northwards. In Bothaville, the R727 t-junctions the R30/R59 co-signage. At a four-way intersection north of Bothaville, as the R504 is the road westwards and the R30 continues northwards, the R59 becomes the road to the east.
The R59 continues in a north-easterly direction, bypassing Viljoenskroon to the north, where it meets the R76 at a 4-way-junction. Continuing north-east from Viljoenskroon, the route meets the southern terminus of the R501 before going to Vredefort.
After bypassing Vredefort to the west, it meets the northern terminus of the R721 north of the town. It continues to Parys from the south-west, where it becomes the main road through the town and meets the southern terminus of the R53 and R500 routes from the North West Province. From Parys, the route continues north-east to meet the southern terminus of the R42 Road Extension (Boundary Road) just before meeting the N1 Kroonvaal Toll Route & crossing over it just north of its Vaal Toll Plaza. It crosses the N1 as a dual carriageway.
It proceeds east-north-east to enter Sasolburg's northern suburbs, where it forms a large interchange with the R57 Golden Highway. It crosses over the R57 and continues north-east to meet Ascot-on-Vaal Road (R716) on the outskirts of Sasolburg before crossing the Vaal River into Gauteng province as the Sybrand van Niekerk Freeway. It is a freeway for its remainder.


=== Gauteng ===
After crossing the Vaal, it interchanges with and crosses the R42 east of Sharpeville, Vanderbijlpark and south-west of Vereeniging  Central (west southbound and east northbound off-ramps only), before crossing the R28 from Sebokeng. It continues north and meets the R54 to the Three Rivers East suburb (R59 North off-ramp only) and R82 to Vereeniging Central (R59 South off-ramp only) at an interchange close to Duncanville. Two further interchanges with the M61 follow as it continues north-east passing to the west of Meyerton, intersecting with the R551 during this time.
It continues north-east, passed Henley on Klip and intersecting with the R557. It continues north, passing to the west of Garthdale and crosses the R550 Road and then over the Klip River. Its next major interchange is with Klip River Drive outside Brakendown and Thokoza. It continues into Brakenhurst, a suburb of Alberton, where it crosses the R554 Road (Swartkoppies Road) and Michelle Avenue in Meyersdal. After a short distance, it meets the N12 Highway (Johannesburg Southern Bypass) at the Reading Interchange (Johannesburg Ring Road) and then proceeds to end at a t-junction with the M38 Road in Tulisa Park, Johannesburg South.


== External links ==
Routes Travel Info