Title: S-Curve Records
Aspects: {'S Curve'}

S-Curve Records was founded in 2000 by former Mercury Records executive Steve Greenberg.  It is based in New York City.  In 2001 the label established a distribution and licensing agreement with EMI Records. Among the hits released by S-Curve between 2000-2004 were "Who Let the Dogs Out?" by Baha Men, "Stacy's Mom" by Fountains of Wayne and Joss Stone's first two albums, the Soul Sessions and Mind Body & Soul. In 2007 Greenberg relaunched the label after a two-year hiatus, during which he served as President of Columbia Records. In 2010, the label's distribution deal with EMI came to an end and S-Curve entered into a new U.S. distribution deal, with Universal Music Group. From 2012-2015, Warner Music Group distributed the label outside of North America.The S-Curve roster and catalog include titles by Andy Grammer, Leslie Odom Jr., AJR, We the Kings, Bay Ledges, Rachel Crow, Netta, Michael Blume, Hailey Knox, Duran Duran, Betty Wright, Fountains of Wayne, Baha Men, The Beu Sisters, Sarah Hudson, Tom Jones, Little Jackie, Diane Birch, Nikki Jean, David Broza, Swamp Dogg, Night Bus, A-WA, Care Bears on Fire, Tinted Windows and Joss Stone.
S-Curve's 2011 release by Betty Wright and the Roots, Betty Wright: The Movie was nominated for a Grammy in the "Best Traditional R&B Performance" category. Andy Grammer's debut album has yielded the hit singles "Keep Your Head Up" (certified Platinum in the U.S.) "Miss Me" and "Fine By Me" (certified Gold). His follow-up album, Magazines or Novels, contained the triple-platinum selling single "Honey, I'm Good" and the gold-certified "Good to Be Alive (Hallelujah)". Grammar's 2016 release "Fresh Eyes" has been certified Platinum in the US, Canada and Australia.  In July, 2012, S-Curve released Joss Stone's the Soul Sessions Vol. II, a sequel to her 2003 debut album, produced by Greenberg, who also produced Stone's first two albums during the label's initial incarnation. That album achieved Top 10 statues on both the Billboard 200 album chart and the UK Albums Chart.
Besides releasing music, S-Curve's business interests include music publishing and the company's equity stakes in on-line media companies Selectable Media (formerly Nabbr), Hyperactivate (creators of Hashtag Art), Soomla, Vydia and Interlude. In 2011 and 2012, music videos released by S-Curve using Interlude's interactive video technology have won MTV "O Music Awards" for "Most Innovative Video": Grammer's "Keep Your Head Up" and We the Kings's "Say You Like Me."
The record label and publishing company were acquired by BMG Rights Management in November 2015, with Greenberg continuing at the helm. S-Curve continues to independently own stakes in its portfolio on-line companies.


== See also ==
List of record labels


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site