Title: Ashy gecko
Aspects: {'S. elegans'}

The ashy gecko (Sphaerodactylus elegans) is a species of gecko native to Cuba (including Isla de la Juventud) and Hispaniola (Haiti, including Gonâve Island and Grand Cayemite). It is a small species, dark in color with many white spots. It is also a good climber. Ashy geckos have been introduced in southern Florida, and have well established populations.There are two subspecies:
Sphaerodactylus elegans elegans Macleay, 1834 — Cuba
Sphaerodactylus elegans punctatissimus Duméril and Bibron, 1836 — HaitiS. elegans elegans is the subspecies native to Cuba including the keys of Sabana, Camaguey, Canarreos, Jardines de la Reina, and isla de la Juventud. The first observation of the species in Florida occurred when it was introduced in 1922. The source of the species was the West Indies excluding the Bahamas. Prior to 1930, early colonized species from the West Indies migrated to nearby islands through the means of cargo shipment. This mechanism is the most probable means of the immigration for S. elegens elegans to Monroe County,specifically the lower Florida Keys. Since 1922, the subspecies has not traveled far. Endemic now to the lower Keys, this species has had almost 100 years to migrate northbound but has been limited by geographic barriers. For starters, many of the lower Keys are connected by bridges used for automobile traffic. The Seven Mile Bridge separates Big Pine Key (including Bahia Honda Key) from Marathon and is not an ideal trek for the tiny, tropical species as it is only a roadway with a hill amidst the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic Ocean. The subspecies has colonized many locations within its geographic barriers including some natural areas. S. elegans elegans is one of only 12 of the 506 species of reptiles and amphibians from the West Indies excluding the Bahamas to colonize in south Florida. The proximity of the origin of the species, in relation to its current geographic locations, is a key factor in immigration.S. elegans elegans is small in nature. There are 18 species of Sphaerodactylus along with 7 morphological groups. S. elegans elegans has granular scales. Its snout has a maximum length of 39 millimeters. Its colors range from a red tail, green midsection, and blue tail all with thinner bands of black across its body horizontally from the left side to right. Its limbs appear to be a variation of colors and seem almost opaque in comparison to the rest of the body. There are no color differences between male and females in this subspecies. The latter sub species, S. elegans punctatissimus, may appear to be more mute and earthly in tones with more of a spotted color distributiuon, overall less vibrant.


== References ==