Title: Sophora flavescens
Aspects: {'S. flavescens'}

Sophora flavescens, the shrubby sophora, is a species of plant in the genus Sophora of the family Fabaceae. This genus contains about 52 species, nineteen varieties, and seven forms that are widely distributed in Asia, Oceania, and the Pacific islands. About fifteen of these species have a long history of use in traditional Chinese medicines.  The root is known as Ku shen and is a commonly-used in traditional Chinese medicine.


== Growth and cultivation ==
Sophora flavescens is an evergreen slow growing shrub growing to 1.5 m (4.9 ft) by 1 m (3.3 ft). It is hardy to 0–10 °F (−18 – −12 °C) and to US zone 6. The plant prefers light (sandy), medium (loamy) and heavy (clay) soils and requires well-drained soil. The plant prefers acid, neutral and basic (alkaline) soils. It cannot grow in the shade. It requires moist soil. Like many other species in the family Fabaceae, this species can fix nitrogen.


== Research ==
Sophorae injection can reduce the toxicity and adverse effects caused by chemotherapy It is anti-inflammatory and an antioxidant.Anti-atherosclerosis  May be an effective cholesterol-lowering agent and useful for preventing hypercholesterolemic atherosclerosis.Sophora flavescens may have the potential for treatment of chronic inflammatory disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis.Neuroprotective in focal cerebral ischemia.A mix of Sophora flavescens and licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) gave better liver protective and anti-hepatocarcinogenic effects than licorice or Sophora alone. In addition, glycyrrhiza + sophora had a protective effect on immunosuppression, a strong non-specific anti-inflammatory effect, and  reduced the incidence of sodium and water retention, protecting against pseudohypercorticosteroidism.Sophora could possibly be used as a treatment for mast cell-derived allergic inflammatory diseases.Inhibitory effects on cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP450 3A4)The methanol extract of Sophora flavescens showed a potent glycosidase inhibitory activity.A promising source of a natural, novel, new antifoulant.May make skin whiter color by inhibition on tyrosinase-dependent melanin biosynthesis. Therefore, a potential source of novel whitening agents for ultraviolet (UV)-sensitive skin  


== Chemistry ==

A variety of chemical compounds have been isolated from S. flavescens, including:

Matrine and matrine oxide, quinolizidine alkaloids found in the roots
Kushenin, a pterocarpan and isoflavonoid
Sophoraflavanone G
7,9,2',4'-Tetrahydroxy-8-isopentenyl-5-methoxychalcone
Sophoridine
Trifolirhizin, a pterocarpan flavonoid, isolated from the roots
8-Prenylkaempferol, a prenylflavonoid
Oxysophocarpine and sophocarpine, alkaloids


== Toxicity ==
Toxic effects from use of the root may include nausea, dizziness, vomiting, constipation, spasms, disturbance of speech, irregular breathing, respiratory failure and death.


== Notes ==


== References ==
Terada, M.; Sano, M.; Ishii, A.I.;  et al. (1982). "Studies on chemotherapy of parasitic helminths. (IV). Effects of alkaloids from Sophora flavescens on the motility of parasitic helminths and isolated host tissues". Nippon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 79: 105–111.
medicinal plants in the Republic of Korea
Ya Ling, Jian; Ying Zhang, Guo; Jie Cui, Zhao; Kai Zhang, Chang (2007). "Supercritical fluid extraction of quinolizidine alkaloids from Sophora flavescens Ait. and purification by high-speed counter-current chromatography" (PDF). Journal of Chromatography A. 1145: 123–127. doi:10.1016/j.chroma.2007.01.080.


== External links ==
A review on phytochemical, ethnomedical and pharmacological studies on genus Sophora, Fabaceae
Antitumor Activities of Kushen: Literature Review