Title: Sivatherium
Aspects: {'S. giganteum'}

Sivatherium ("Shiva's beast", from Shiva and therium, Latinized form of Ancient Greek θηρίον - thēríon) is an extinct genus of giraffids that ranged throughout Africa to the Indian subcontinent. The species Sivatherium giganteum is, by weight, the largest giraffid known, and also possibly the largest ruminant of all time. The Afro-Asiatic species, S. maurusium, was once placed within the genus "Libytherium".
S. giganteum remains have been recovered from the Himalayan foothills, dating around 1 million years ago. S. maurusium may have gone extinct as recently as 8,000 years ago, as depictions that greatly resemble it are known from ancient rock paintings in the Sahara and Central West India.


== Description ==
 
 
Sivatherium resembled the modern okapi, but was far larger, and more heavily built, being  about 2.2 m (7.2 ft) tall at the shoulder, 3 m (9.8 ft) in total height with a weight up to 400–500 kg (880–1,100 lb). A newer estimate has come up with an estimated body mass of about 1,250 kg (2,760 lb). This would make Sivatherium one of the largest known ruminants, rivalling the modern giraffe and the largest bovines. This weight estimate is thought to be an underestimate, as it does not take into account the large horns possessed by males of the species. Sivatherium had a wide, antler-like pair of ossicones on its head, and a second pair of ossicones above its eyes. Its shoulders were very powerful to support the neck muscles required to lift the heavy skull.


== See also ==

Hydaspitherium
Bramatherium
Vishnutherium
Prolibytherium


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Barry Cox, Colin Harrison, R.J.G. Savage, and Brian Gardiner. (1999): The Simon & Schuster Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs and Prehistoric Creatures: A Visual Who's Who of Prehistoric Life. Simon & Schuster.
David Norman. (2001): The Big Book Of Dinosaurs. pg. 228, Walcome books.
After the Dinosaurs: The Age of Mammals (Life of the Past) by Donald R. Prothero
The Evolution of Artiodactyls by Donald R. Prothero and Scott E. Foss
Vertebrate Palaeontology by Michael J. Benton and John Sibbick
Evolving Eden: An Illustrated Guide to the Evolution of the African Large Mammal Fauna by Alan Turner and Mauricio Anton
Classification of Mammals by Malcolm C. McKenna and Susan K. Bell  \
The Book of Life: An Illustrated History of the Evolution of Life on Earth, Second Edition by Stephen Jay Gould
World Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs & Prehistoric Creatures: The Ultimate Visual Reference To 1000 Dinosaurs And Prehistoric Creatures Of Land, Air And Sea ... And Cretaceous Eras (World Encyclopedia) by Dougal Dixon
Eyewitness: Prehistoric Life by William Lindsay
Walker's Mammals of the World (2-Volume Set) (Walker's Mammals of the World) by Ronald M. Nowak
Horns, Tusks, and Flippers: The Evolution of Hoofed Mammals by Donald R. Prothero and Robert M. Schoch


== External links ==