Title: Spondias mombin
Aspects: {'S. lutea'}

Spondias mombin, also known as yellow mombin or hog plum is a species a tree and flowering plant in the family Anacardiaceae. It is native to the tropical Americas, including the West Indies. The tree was introduced by the Portuguese in South Asia in the beginning of the 17th century. It has been naturalized in parts of Africa, India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, The Bahamas, Indonesia, and other Caribbean islands. It is rarely cultivated except in parts of the Brazilian Northeast.
The mature fruit has a leathery skin and a thin layer of pulp. The seed has an oil content of 31.5%.


== Description ==
Spondias mombin is a small deciduous tree up to 20 m (66 ft) high and 1.5 m (4.9 ft) in girth, moderately buttressed.  Its bark is thick, corky, and deeply fissured. When slashed, it is pale pink, darkening rapidly.  Branches are low and branchlets are glabrous.  The leaves are pinnate, with 5-8 leaflets opposite pairs with a terminal leaflet, 10 cm × 5 cm (4 in × 2 in), oblong or oblong lanceolate, broadly acuminate, glabrous. The flowers bloom January to May and are sweet-scented, in large, lax terminal panicles of small white flowers. Fruits appear July to September and are nearly 4 cm (1.5 in) long, ovoid yellow, acid, wrinkled when dry.  The fruits have a sharp, somewhat acid taste and are edible. Their flesh surrounds a single spiny kernel.


== Use as food ==

The fruit pulp is either eaten fresh or made into juice, concentrate, jellies, and sherbets.
In Thailand this fruit is called makok (Thai: มะกอก) and is used in som tam as a secondary ingredient. The young leaves, which taste slightly bitter and sour, are sometimes served raw together with certain types of nam phrik (Thai chilli pastes). It is also served with chilli powder in Bangladesh where the fruit is known as আমড়া (Amṛa).
As a member of the Sumac family (Anacardiaceae), exposure to the sap of this species may result in an identical allergic reaction to that of the poison ivy plant. Those with a known sensitivity to urushiol should exercise caution in consuming or handling this species.


== Traditional medicine ==
In traditional medicine, Spondias mombin has had a variety of uses.  The fruit has been used as a diuretic and febrifuge.  The bark is astringent and used as an emetic and for diarrhea, dysentery, hemorrhoids, gonorrhoea, and leukorrhea.  The flowers and leaves are used to make a tea for stomach ache, biliousness, urethritis, cystitis, and inflammation.


== Language ==
Spondias mombin has several common names. Throughout the Spanish-speaking Caribbean, except Cuba where they are called Ciruelas, in Costa Rica and in Mexico it is called jobo (derived from the Carib language ). In El Salvador, it is called Jocote de Corona. Among the English-speaking Caribbean islands it is known as yellow mombin or hog plum. In Jamaica it is also called Spanish plum,  gully plum or coolie plum. In Surinam the fruit is called Mope. In Brazil, the fruit is known by several different names, such as cajá, taperebá and ambaló. In Peru, it is known as uvos or mango ciruelo. In Ghana, it is hog plum or Ashanti plum. It is called "Akukor" in the Ewe language of Ghana. In Bengali, it is called আমড়া (Amṛa). In Nigeria, the fruit is called Iyeye or Yeye in the Yoruba language, ngulungwu in Igbo and isada in Hausa. Other common names include hug plum, true yellow mombin, golden apple or Java plum, Ambaralla (ඇඹරැල්ල) in Sri Lanka. In Somalia, it is called Isbaandes. In Panama it is called jobo. In "habla congo" of palo mayombe in Cuba, it is called nkunia guenguere kunansieto', ciruela. In Palauan, it is called titimel. 


== See also ==
List of plants of Cerrado vegetation of Brazil
Amazonian cuisine
Spondias purpurea (Purple mombin)
Spondias tuberosa (Umbú)
Spondias pinnata (India)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Spondias mombin in West African plants – A Photo Guide.