Title: Syngonium podophyllum
Aspects: {'S. poeppigii'}

Syngonium podophyllum is a species of aroid, and commonly cultivated as a houseplant. Common names include: arrowhead plant, arrowhead vine, arrowhead philodendron, goosefoot, African evergreen, and American evergreen. The species is native to a wide region of Latin America from Mexico to Bolivia, and naturalized in the West Indies, Florida, Texas, Hawaii, and other places.


== Etymology ==
Syngonium podophyllum is the most commonly cultivated species in the genus Syngonium, and is often referred to simply as syngonium. It was originally confused with the similar-looking African genus Nephthytis, and this is still used as a common name for the plant.  It was given its own genus in 1879.The Latin specific epithet podophyllum means “with stout-stalked leaves”.


== Cultivation ==
As a creeper, it needs some support. It can also be grown as a groundcover plant. The soil should be humus and systematically watered. Varieties with bright leaves with dyes need a well-lit place, though those with dark green leaves can grow in a darker place. The summer temperature should not exceed 24°C, in winter it should not be lower than 15 ° C. Requiring moist air, it should be watered 2-3 times a week in summer, but much less often in winter. 
To ensure adequate humidity, the plant pot should be placed in a larger container with constantly moist peat and sprayed with water daily. Dusty leaves are to be wiped with a damp cloth. Feed in the summer with a small dose of fertilizers dissolved in water. After a few years of cultivation, the plant becomes unattractive, where it cutting is advisable, then it will release new shoots. It should be transplanted only when necessary.It has gained the Royal Horticultural Society’s Award of Garden Merit.


== Propagation ==
The plant can be propagated by cuttings in water, or straight into potting compost. Nonetheless, both methods have a good success rate, providing the right part of the plant is cut. Cuttings using the rooting machine are rooted in a multiplier at a temperature of 18°C. Seedlings from the tops of the shoots are the easiest for sprouting, the hardest from the bottom part of the stem.


== Description ==
There are several variegated cultivars, the main differences being in the position and extent of the cream or white markings. Some leaves are almost entirely white, pink or yellow. All parts of the plant are poisonous and cause severe mouth pain if eaten. It is not unusual to find these growing in Sub-tropical Florida landscapes, where homeowners and Gardeners  need to be aware of the severe skin burning sensations caused by the plants sap containing oxalic acid and the eye damage potential from raphides.


== Varieties ==
Among the wild populations, two varieties are formally recognized:
Syngonium podophyllum var. peliocladum (Schott) Croat - Costa Rica, Panama
Syngonium podophyllum var. podophyllum - widespread as a native from Mexico to Brazil and Bolivia, as well as Trinidad; naturalized in the West Indies (including the Cayman Islands and the Bahamas), Florida, Texas, Hawaii, Seychelles, Borneo, and Malaysia


== Gallery ==


== References ==