Title: Telegraph & Argus
Aspects: {'T & A'}

The Telegraph & Argus is the daily newspaper for Bradford, West Yorkshire, England. Now printed in Middlesbrough, Teesside (and no longer on its own presses in Bradford) it is published six times each week, from Monday to Saturday inclusive. The newspaper retains its iconic offices in Drake Street, Bradford, from where its journalists work. Locally, the paper is known as the T&A. It also breaks news 24/7 on its website.


== Overview ==
Founded in 1868, the paper was a broadsheet until 1989 when it became tabloid. It features a range of news, features, sport, lifestyle articles and classified advertising, with weekly supplements on motoring and property and a weekly television guide.The Telegraph & Argus is owned by Newsquest, the second largest publisher of regional newspapers in the United Kingdom, which is owned by the American media empire Gannett. Perry Austin-Clarke was editor from 1992 to 2017, making him the paper's longest-serving editor. He presided over the worst circulation decline in the paper's history. As of 2017 the editor was Nigel Burton.


== History ==
The Argus Weekly occupied Argus Chambers in the Britannia House building over a century ago. The Yorkshire Evening Argus and the Bradford Daily Telegraph newspapers later combined to form the Bradford Telegraph & Argus, which has occupied its present building, the former Milligan and Forbes Warehouse for some decades. "Bradford" was dropped from the title in the 1930s, when the paper's circulation area spread across much of West Yorkshire. At one time it had branch offices in nine towns across the region, as well as an office in Morecambe, the Lancashire coastal resort to which many Bradfordians went to retire. At its height the paper's daily sale exceeded 130,000. It is now about one tenth of that figure. Thirty-six years ago a new wing with a skin of dark glass was added to house the printing presses, and these machines can be seen through the windows from the street. However, they are no longer to be seen working, since the newspaper further reduced it economic connection with the city in November 2014 by moving its printing operation to Middlesbrough, in Teesside, while making its Bradford press room staff redundant. Much of the newspaper's advertising content is now typeset in India.
There are plans to sell the building itself now that the presses have been sold off piecemeal.

		
		


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Bradford Telegraph and Argus at Wikimedia Commons
Official website