Title: Pycnoporus sanguineus
Aspects: {'T. cinnabarina'}

Pycnoporus sanguineus is a white rot saprobic fungus. It was discovered on Guana Island (part of the Virgin Islands) but occurs throughout the tropics, usually growing on dead hardwoods.  It grows in the form of a thin dry conk with a lateral attachment to its substrate, is bright orange on all surfaces with concentric zonation, and the pores on the underside are minute.  It is inedible due to its tough texture.
It is also a plant pathogen infecting plane and mango trees.


== Description ==
P. sanguineus is used for both industrial and medicinal purposes throughout the world. A pigment extracted from the caps called cinnabarin is used in textile industries for the partial and complete de-colorization of certain dyes. Other industrial uses of this species include testing methods for wood treatment products and enzymes used in bio-remediation for the breakdown of crude oils. Traditional medicinal uses were first utilized by natives in surrounding areas of this species. Medicinal uses of P. sanguineus help relieve symptoms of the following diseases: arthritis, gout, styptic, sore throats, ulcers, tooth aches, fevers, and hemorrhages. P. sanguineus also displays numerous anti-bacterial properties against E. coli, K. pneumoniae, P. aeroginosa, S. typhi, and S. aureus by inhibiting specific metabolic pathways. Currently, P. sanguineus is being used in medicine for the absorption of certain heavy metals contained within the blood stream.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Ability of Pycnoporus Sanguineus to Remove Copper Ions from Aqueous SolutionM. D. Mashitah, Z. Zulfadhfy, S. Bhatla
Artificial Cells, Blood Substitutes and Biotechnology, Jan 1999, Vol. 27, No. 5-6, Pages 429-433.

Binding Mechanism of Heavy Metals Biosorption by Pycnoporus SanguineusM. D. Mashitah, Z. Zulfadhly, S. Bhatta
Artificial Cells, Blood Substitutes and Biotechnology, Jan 1999, Vol. 27, No. 5-6, Pages 441-445.

Blanchette, R.A. 1988. Resistance of hardwood vessels to degradation by white rot Basidiomycetes.Can. J. Bot. 66: 1841–1847

Centre for Research in Fungal Diversity, Department of Ecology and Biodiversity, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR, China
Mashitah, M. D.; Zulfadhly, Z.; Bhatta, S.. “Binding Mechanism of Heavy Metals Biosorption by Pycnoporus Sanguineus” 27.5 (1999). 04 Dec. 2009 http://www.informaworld.com/10.3109/10731199909117717