Title: University of Khartoum
Aspects: {'U of K'}

University of Khartoum (shortened to UofK) (Arabic: جامعة الخرطوم‎) is a multi-campus, co-educational, public university located in Khartoum. It is the largest and oldest university in Sudan. UofK was founded as Gordon Memorial College in 1902 and established in 1956 when Sudan gained independence. Since that date, the University of Khartoum has been recognized as a top university and a high-ranked academic institution in Sudan and Africa.It features several institutes, academic units and research centers including Mycetoma Research Center, Soba University Hospital, Saad Abualila Hospital, Dr. Salma Dialysis centre, Institute of Endemic Diseases, Institute for Studies and Promotion of Animal Exports, Institute of African and Asian Studies, Institute of Prof. Abdalla ElTayeb for Arabic Language, Development Studies and Research Institute and U of K publishing house. The Sudan Library, a section of the university's library, serves as the national library of Sudan.


== History ==

In 1898 after Britain gained dominance in Sudan as part of a condominium arrangement, Lord Kitchener proposed founding a college in the memory of Gordon of Khartoum, who was killed in the Battle of Khartoum. Gordon Memorial College was founded in 1902 with primary education being its sole program.
By 1906, the college was offering programs for training assistant engineers, land surveyors and primary school teachers. The first equipped laboratory for bacteriological analysis was added in 1905, with donations from Sir Henry Wellcome, an American-British pharmaceutical entrepreneur and archaeologist.
In 1924, the college incorporated programs in Sharia, engineering, education (teachers training), clerical work, accounting and science. The Kitchener School of Medicine, the first medical school in Sudan, was established.
In 1936, the School of Law was established. In 1947, the college was affiliated with The University of London as the first overseas participant in its "special relationship" scheme.  The first graduates to receive University of London degrees completed their programs in 1950. The next year, Gordon Memorial College was formally renamed University College Khartoum, which incorporated the Kitchener School of Medicine.
When Sudan gained independence in 1956, the new Parliament passed a bill to award university status to Khartoum University College. It officially became Khartoum University on 24 July 1956. The eminent horticultural scientist John Pilkington Hudson was a visiting professor in 1961-3, who founded its department of horticulture.On 5 April 1984, the Government announced the closure of all faculties of the university. The university was reopened fully on August 1.The university was closed several times after the 1989 military coup d'état for the intensive participation of its students in pro-democracy rallies.


== Student body ==
The university has 16,800 undergraduate students in 23 faculties, schools and graduate research institutes. The annual admission rate is 3,500 students, 55% of whom are female. There are 6,000 graduate students (graduate diploma, M.Sc. and Ph.D.). It has 850 teaching staff (faculty), 20 research fellows and 500 teaching assistants.


== Campuses ==
There are four campuses:

The Central Campus in Central Khartoum.
The Medical Campus located in the North of Central Khartoum.
The Agriculture and Veterinary Campus  at Shambat, Khartoum North.
The Faculty of Education Campus at Omdurman 15 km from central campus.
Suba Campus (Faculty of Medical Laboratory Science, Suba Hospital) at Suba,20 km South of Khartoum.
The management studies campus in central Khartoum.


== Admission ==
Undergraduate admission policy is governed by the Board of Higher Education of Sudan, which sets the minimum admission requirement for high school students based on their national origin (Sudanese vs. non-Sudanese) and the high-school certificate board.
For post-graduate studies, the requirements are on the university admission webpage.Students of University of Khartoum engage in Workshops, Lectures, Debates, Forum Activism, book clubs and Political Parties. Sporting Activities include university sports championship tournament and Sudan colleges championship tournament.


== Faculties ==
Faculty of Arts
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Science
Faculty of Nursing Sciences
Faculty of Medicine
Faculty of Pharmacy
Faculty of Dentistry
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Architecture
Faculty of Mathematical Sciences
School  of Management Studies
Faculty of Economic and Social Studies
Faculty of Education
Faculty of Agriculture
Faculty of Forestry
Faculty of Animal Production
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Faculty of Medical Laboratory Science
Faculty of Technological and Developmental StudiesThe Faculty of Medical Laboratory Sciences was founded in 1966 under the name “School of Medical Laboratory Technicians” as a joint venture between the Faculty of Medicine, University of Khartoum and the Ministry of Health.
Its development was continued until in 1993 an ordinance was passed for the establishment of the College of Medical Laboratory Sciences an independent institution affiliated to the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research.In 1997, it was merged with the University of Khartoum as the Faculty of Medical Laboratory Sciences (FMLS).
The Faculty of Medical Laboratory Sciences offers preparation for careers in medical (clinical) laboratory sciences. A career in medical laboratory sciences is a great way to combine an aptitude for science with the desire to help others. Medical Laboratory Scientists, also known as clinical laboratory scientists, are highly skilled professionals who perform analytical tests on blood, tissue, and body fluids to provide laboratory information for the detection, diagnosis, and treatment of human diseases. There also is a growing trend for medical lab scientists to perform wellness laboratory testing aimed at preventing disease.
Degrees Awarded:
General B.Sc.: 4 years
Honor B.Sc.: 5 years
M.S.c: By courses
M.Sc.: By research
PhD: By research
Departments of the Faculty of Medical Laboratory Sciences:
2.1- Department of Microbiology:
It is one of the biggest departments in FMLS, it includes the following disciplines: Medical Bacteriology, Medical Virology, Medical Mycology, Immunology.
2.2- Departments of Haematology and Immunohematology:
Deals with all aspects related to blood, its components and related diseases such as anaemia, cancer, and also blood transfusion.
2.3- Department of Parasitology and Medical Entomology:
Teaches the knowledge of pathogenic parasites such as malaria, worms such as Schistosomes and insect vectors of diseases.
2.4- Department of Chemical Pathology:
Deals with everything related to body chemistry including but not limited to chemical shifts in the body due to diseases, hormonal  balance, enzymes, trace elements and toxicology.
2.5- Department of Histopathology and Cytology:
Focuses on identifying the composition of cells and tissues of the body and the change in their composition due to chronic cases. Division of the Department: Cytopathology, Histotechniques, Immunohistochemistry, Cytogenetics, Molecular Pathology, Cellular pathology

Faculty of Public and Environmental Health


=== Faculty of Dentistry ===
Faculty of Dentistry was established in 1971 as a school that belong to the Faculty of Medicine. It was the first in Sudan to provide dental training. In 1992 it upgraded to a separate faculty. The school now has approximately 60 outstanding faculty and staff and 600 students enrolled in BDS degree programs, 90 postgraduate and 90 dental technology.


==== Academic programs ====
B.D.S. (five years)
Intermediate Diploma in dental technology (three years)
M.Sc. in wide variety of specialties (two years)
Ph.D. in wide variety of specialties (three years)
DDS - RD (four years)
DDS - Dental Specialty (four years)


==== Facilities ====
Dental Clinics
Phantom Head Lab
Dental Laboratory
Museum
Histopathology Lab
Dental Radiology Unit
Library and e-library


==== Center for MFDRCSI Examinations ====
By the end of 2011, Faculty of Dentistry became the only center in Africa for examinations of the Diploma of Member of Faculty of Dentistry, Royal College of Surgeon in Ireland (NNJ). Part 1 exam is held twice a year and Part 2 is once a year. In all the previous exams, faculty graduate achieved outstanding grades.


==== Association of Dental Students- University of Khartoum (ADSUK) ====
Faculty of Dentistry Student have an association through which they can realize a lot of their activities. It is a member in the International Association of Dental Students (IADS). ADSUK organized  one of the most successful IADS' conferences in Khartoum in 2006. One of the most programs arranged by ADSUK are the Health Field Trip where students as well as staff member travel to rural areas and stay there to give distant citizens dental services and to educate them.


== Research centers ==
University of Khartoum plays a leading role in scientific research and development through a number of specialized research centers and institutes:

Institute of Endemic Diseases
Professor Abdalla Eltayeb Institute for Arabic Language
Institute of African and Asian Studies
Building and Road Research Institute (BRRI)
Development Studies and Reserarch Institute
Mycetoma Research Center
Institute of Environmental Studies


== Libraries ==
University of Khartoum Library, known as the "Main Library," is one of the biggest and oldest libraries in universities in Sudan and Africa. The library building represents the historical and iconic heritage of U. of K. In addition to the Main library, there are small libraries in each faculty and institute as well as Altegany Almahi library for postgraduate students and Sudan Library.


== ICT ==
University of Khartoum has an Information Technology and Communication Center which is responsible for developing and managing of the ICT infrastructure of the university. All university campuses are connected by dedicated high-speed links (fiber optics); WiFi covers most of the campuses and electronic registration on the university website. In addition to the ICT centre, the Faculty of Mathematical Sciences has its own Information Technology research unit which is active in developing and promoting Open Source software in Sudan.


== Notable academics ==

Michael Grant, prolific British classicist, was vice-chancellor from 1956 to 1958.
Wendy James, British anthropologist who was a lecturer in social anthropology from 1964 to 1969; she was later a professor at the University of Oxford.
Sir Marriott Fawckner Nicholls, the British prominent genitourinary surgeon, was professor of surgery from 1964 until his death in 1969.


=== Vice-chancellors ===
Since the independence of Sudan, highly qualified Sudanese were appointed to the position of University of Khartoum vice chancellor. The first one was Dr. Nasr El Hag Ali and the most notable one is Prof. ELnazeer Dafalla.


== Notable alumni ==

University of Khartoum plays a great role in building and qualifying most of the Sudanese leaders.


=== Politics ===
Hassan al-Turabi: Leader of the National Islamic Front and former dean of the Faculty of Law
Ali Osman Taha: Former vice president of Sudan
John Garang: Former leader of Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement
Francis Deng: Former United Nations' Under-Secretary General
Ibrahim Abood Ahmed: Former commander in chief of Sudanese military forces and president of Sudan
Sirr Al-Khatim Al-Khalifa: Former prime minister and minister of education of Sudan
Mohamed Ahmed Mahjoob: Former prime minister and foreign minister of Sudan
Babiker Awadalla: Former prime minister and foreign minister of Sudan
Rashid Bakr: Former vice president and prime minister of Sudan
Al-Jazuli Daf'allah: Former prime minister and head of the Sudanese Medical Association of Sudan
Abdelmahmood Abdelhaleem, Former Sudan's ambassador to the United Nations
Usamah Mohamad: Citizen journalist and Amnesty International prisoner of conscience


=== Science, technology and medicine ===
Elfatih A.B. Eltahir:  Professor of Hydrology and Water Resources at MIT.


=== Art and education ===
Abdalla Eltayeb: Scholar in the Arabic language
Tayeb Salih: Novelist
Leila Aboulela: Writer and playwright
Meena Alexander: Poet and Distinguished Professor of English at Hunter College and the CUNY Graduate Center
Mandour Elmahdi: Author, former Principal of the Institute of Education (Sudan) and Director of Education (Saudi Arabia)
Awn Alsharif Qasim: Writer, encyclopedist and scholar of Islamic history and of Sudanese dialects
Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im: Islamic scholar and Professor of Law at Emory University School of Law


== References ==


== External links ==

 Media related to University of Khartoum at Wikimedia Commons

Official website
Durham University Library Special Collections Catalogue