Title: University of Michigan Law School
Aspects: {'U of M School of Law'}

The University of Michigan Law School (Michigan Law) is the law school of the University of Michigan, in Ann Arbor. Founded in 1859, the school offers Juris Doctor (JD), Master of Laws (LLM), and Doctor of Juridical Science (SJD) degree programs.
Michigan Law School consistently ranks among the highest-rated law schools in the United States and the world.  In the 2019 U.S. News ranking, Michigan Law is ranked 9th overall.  Notable alumni include U.S. Supreme Court Justices Frank Murphy, William Rufus Day, and George Sutherland, as well as a number of heads of state and corporate executives. Approximately 89% of class of 2018 graduates were employed within ten months of graduation; its bar passage rate in 2017 was 92.5%.Michigan Law has placed 41 of its alumni on United States Circuit Courts, over 100 of its graduates on federal trial courts, and 36 of its graduates on the Michigan Supreme Court, including 16 who served as Chief Justice. More than 170 Michigan law graduates have served in the United States Congress, including 20 United States Senators and more than 150 Congressional representatives. Additionally, numerous graduates have served as state legislators.
The school has an enrollment of about 920 as well as 81 full-time faculty members (60 tenured and tenure-track and 21 in clinical and legal practice).


== History ==

The Law School was founded in 1859, and quickly rose to national prominence. By 1870, Michigan was the largest law school in the country.
In 1870, Gabriel Franklin Hargo graduated from Michigan as the second African-American to graduate from law school in the United States. In 1871 Sarah Killgore, a Michigan Law graduate, became the first woman to both graduate from law school and be admitted to the bar.Although the law school is part of the public University of Michigan, less than 2 percent of the law school's expenses are covered by state funds.  The remainder (97–98% of Michigan Law's budget) is supplied by private gifts, tuition, and endowments.
In 2009, Michigan Law began a $102 million enterprise to construct a new law building that would remain loyal to the English Gothic style. The enterprise was fully funded by endowments and private gifts. 2009 also marked the school's sesquicentennial celebration.  As a part of the festivities, Chief Justice John Roberts visited the school and participated in the groundbreaking ceremony for the new building.  The building was dedicated in 2012 and called South Hall.  In December 2018, South Hall was renamed Jeffries Hall.


== Campus ==

The Law Quadrangle is designed in the English Gothic style.
Built between 1924 and 1933 by the architectural firm York and Sawyer with funds donated by attorney and alumnus William W. Cook, the Cook Law Quadrangle comprises four buildings:

Hutchins Hall, the main academic building, named for former Dean of the Law School and President of the University, Harry Burns Hutchins
The Legal Research Building. In 2007, the University of Michigan Reading Room was named 94th on a list of "American's Favorite Buildings." The building is one of only three law buildings on the list.
John Cook Dormitory
The Lawyer's Club, providing additional dormitory rooms and a meeting space for the residents of the Quad; highlighted by a Great Lounge, and a dining room with a high-vaulted ceiling, an oak floor, and dark oak paneling.In 2012, extensive renovations of the Lawyers Club were undertaken thanks in part to a $20 million gift from Berkshire Hathaway vice-chairman Charles T. Munger, and was re-opened on August 19, 2013 for the Fall 2013 school year.


== Admissions and rankings ==
Michigan Law was ranked third in the initial U.S. News & World Report law school rankings in 1987. Michigan Law is also one of the "T14" law schools, schools that have consistently ranked within the top 14 law schools since U.S. News began publishing rankings. In the 2019 U.S. News ranking, Michigan Law is ranked 9th overall. The 2010 Super Lawyers rankings placed Michigan as second. Michigan Law is currently ranked 6th for Clinical Training and 6th for International Law.  In a 2011 U.S. News "reputational ranking" of law schools by hiring partners at the nation's top law firms, the University of Michigan Law School ranked 4th. Michigan Law ranked 15th among U.S. law schools, tied with the Georgetown University Law Center, for the number of times its tenured faculty's published scholarship was highly cited in legal journals during the period 2010 through 2014.Admission to Michigan Law is highly selective. For the class entering in the fall of 2012, 1,238 out of 5,062 applicants (24.5%) were offered admission, with 344 matriculating. The 25th and 75th LSAT percentiles for the 2018 entering class were 165 and 171, respectively, with a median of 169 (top 3.3 percent of test takers). The 25th and 75th undergraduate GPA percentiles were 3.55 and 3.89, respectively, with a median of 3.77. Approximately 97.5 percent of the graduating class of 2017 was employed by nine months after graduation. Approximately 86% of the class of 2017 secured positions as a judicial clerk or in private practice. The majority of Michigan Law grads work in New York, Illinois, California, Washington, D.C., and Michigan.


== Publications ==
Michigan Law School students publish several law journals in addition to the Michigan Law Review, the sixth oldest legal journal in the U.S. These include:

University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform
Michigan Journal of International Law
Michigan Journal of Gender and Law
Michigan Journal of Race & Law
Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review
Michigan Journal of Environmental and Administrative Law
Michigan Business & Entrepreneurial Law Review, formerly known as the Michigan Journal Private Equity and Venture Capital LawJournal membership is obtained through participation in writing competitions.


== Moot court competitions ==
Students may compete in intramural moot court competitions, the oldest of which is the Henry M. Campbell Moot Court Competition, established in 1926 and first held in the 1927-1928 academic year. Other moot court competitions include the Child Welfare Law Moot Court Competition, Criminal Law Moot Court Competition, the Entertainment Media and Arts Moot Court Competition, the Environmental Law Moot Court Competition, the Intellectual Property Moot Court Competition, the Jessup International Law Moot Court Competition, the Native American Law Students Association Competition, and the 1L Oral Advocacy Competition.


== Clinical programs ==
Michigan Law's clinical program allows students to provide direct representation to clients under the supervision of full-time faculty. There are 18 clinical programs, including the Child Advocacy Law Clinic, the Entrepreneurship Clinic, the Environmental Law Clinic, the Federal Appellate Litigation Clinic, the International Transactions Clinic, the Michigan Innocence Clinic, the Transactional Lab, and the Unemployment Insurance Clinic.


== Student organizations ==
Michigan Law offers a wide array of student organizations centered around various interest areas, including politics, pro bono work, community service, race, gender, religion, and hobbies. Student organizations organize various annual events, from student pageants such as Mr. Wolverine to the Michigan Law Culture Show.


== Externships and internships ==
Michigan's externship program is designed to provide students with real-world legal experience and advanced research opportunities beyond what is separately available in either a classroom or a clinic. Externships are available in places such as Switzerland, South Africa, and India.


== Student Funded Fellowships ==
Student Funded Fellowships (SFF) is a program designed to fund Michigan Law students who accept public interest summer jobs with low pay and to help 1Ls finance the living costs associated with their summer jobs. SFF is governed by a board of law students and operates independently of the Law School. The Board elects its own officers, including two co-chairs, a treasurer, and various committee chairs. Board members head fundraising efforts throughout the year, ranging from Donate a Day's Pay (DADP), in which highly paid law firm summer associates donate a day's salary to SFF, to a grand auction in March that invites bids on various donated items, including sports tickets, meals and activities with faculty members, and art. In the late spring, Board members review applications for summer funding and select a limited number of qualified students for grants. Beginning with the summer of 2016, SFF began offering every 1L an interest-free $4000 loan for their summer expenses that is repaid on a sliding scale depending on how much money they make during their 1L and 2L summers.


== Employment & cost of attendance ==
According to Michigan's ABA-required employment disclosures, 92% of the graduates of the Class of 2013 were employed or seeking an advanced degree. This includes the 85% of the class who had obtained jobs requiring a J.D. Of the Class of 2013, 49.6% were employed by firms of greater than 100 attorneys and 12.0% obtained clerkships. Michigan's Law School Transparency under-employment score is 5.6%,  indicating the percentage of the Class of 2014 who are unemployed, pursuing an additional degree, or working in a non-professional, short-term, or part-time job nine months after graduation.Tuition at Michigan for the 2014-2015 academic year is $51,398 for residents of the state of Michigan and $54,398 for non-residents. The estimated cost of living for a Michigan student is $18,030. Assuming no tuition increases, a typical three-year course of study at Michigan therefore costs $208,284 (or $69,428 per year) for residents and $217,434 (or $72,428 per year) for non-residents.


== Notable faculty ==


=== Current ===
Mark D. West, Dean and Nippon Life Professor of Law- scholar of international commercial law, criminal law and Japanese law
Evan Caminker, Dean Emeritus - constitutional law scholar
Theodore J. St. Antoine, Dean Emeritus - legal philosopher and labor law scholar
Samuel Bagenstos - constitutional scholar and expert on disability rights
Edward H. Cooper - civil procedure scholar
Steven P. Croley - expert on administrative and regulatory law
Phoebe C. Ellsworth - scholar of law and psychology
Samuel R. Gross - Criminal law expert widely cited for work on exonerations
Daniel Halberstam -comparative constitutional law, transnational law and European law scholar
James C. Hathaway -  international refugee law expert and scholar of public international law
John Hudson - English legal historian
Yale Kamisar, Professor Emeritus - criminal law and procedure expert ( known as the "father of Miranda" for his influential role in the landmark U.S Supreme Court decision in Miranda v. Arizona (1966).)
Ellen D. Katz - voting rights and election law scholar
Thomas E. Kauper - scholar of property law and antitrust
Vikramaditya Khanna - expert on international commercial law and the laws of India
James E. Krier - property law scholar
Jessica Litman - intellectual property scholar
Kyle D. Logue - insurance, tax and private law scholar
Catharine MacKinnon - feminist theorist, scholar and activist
John A. E. Pottow -  scholar of international commercial law, bankruptcy and consumer finance
Richard Primus - constitutional theorist
Margaret Radin - legal philosopher, contract and property theorist
Margo Schlanger - civil rights scholar and founder of the Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse
Rebecca J. Scott - legal historian
Bruno Simma -German international law expert; served as a judge on the International Court of Justice from 2003 until 2012
James Boyd White - founder of the "Law and Literature" movement
James J. White - Commercial law expert
Christina B. Whitman - Francis A. Allen Collegiate Professor of Law


=== Former ===
Nathan Abbott - former dean of Stanford Law School and property law scholar
T. Alexander Aleinikoff - international law scholar and former dean at Georgetown University Law Center
Lee Bollinger - President of Columbia University, former President of the University of Michigan
Henry Billings Brown - Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States
Thomas M. Cooley - Legal scholar and Chief Justice of the Michigan Supreme Court
Heidi Li Feldman, law professor
Herbert Funk Goodrich - Judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit and former dean of the University of Pennsylvania Law School
Harry Hutchins - fourth President of the University of Michigan
Charles Wycliffe Joiner - Judge for the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan
Douglas Laycock - constitutional law scholar
Debra Ann Livingston - Judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
Wade H. McCree - first African American appointed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
John W. Reed - civil procedure expert
Henry Wade Rogers - former Judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
Lawrence G. Sager - Constitutional theorist and former dean at the University of Texas Law School
Joseph Sax - environmental law scholar known for developing the public trust doctrine
Joel Seligman - President of the University of Rochester
A. W. B. Simpson - British legal historian
Scott J. Shapiro - legal philosopher
David S. Tatel - judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
Elizabeth Warren - bankruptcy expert and senior United States Senator from Massachusetts
Joseph H. H. Weiler - European law expert


== Notable alumni ==


== See also ==
List of University of Michigan law and government alumni
List of University of Michigan legislator alumni
List of University of Michigan people


== Notes ==
^  University of Michigan: Diversity Research & Resources, Proposal 2 Information.  Link to UM website
^  Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action v. Granholm, No. 2:06-cv-15024 (E.D. Mi.) (Lawson); Nos. 06–2640, 06–2642 (6th Cir. 2007).
^  January 10, 2007 statement by Dean Evan Caminker.


== References ==


== External links ==
University of Michigan Law School