Title: University of Patras
Aspects: {'U of P'}

University of Patras (UPatras; Greek: Πανεπιστήμιο Πατρών, Panepistímio Patrón) is a public university in Patras, Greece.  It is the third largest university in Greece with respect to the size of the student body, the staff, and the number of departments. The University of Patras is considered one of the best universities in Greece and has been placed in the top 200 universities in subject areas.  In 2014, the student population was 21,000 (17,000 at the undergraduate level and 4,000 at the postgraduate level). It has 672 faculty members, 155 scientific staff members and 372 administrative personnel and comprises 24 Departments, which operate 161 laboratories and 17 clinics. 


== History ==
The University of Patras was established on 11 November 1964 as a self-administered academic institution under the supervision of the Greek Government. It was housed in the city centre of Patras, Greece and later in a campus area of about 600 acres selected in 1968 and appropriated on behalf of the university, located in the adjacent municipality of Rio. Covering an area of 4.5 km², it is one of the largest in the country.In June 2013 the University of Western Greece was incorporated in the University of Patras. The University is a two-city campus, situated in both Patras and Agrinion.The university conducts research in Environment, Health, Biotechnology, Mechanics, Electronics, Informatics and Basic Science. A number of the departments, laboratories and clinics have been designated as Centres of Excellence, on the basis of international assessment.


== Emblem ==
The emblem of the university is Andrew the Apostle. Its opening took place on 30 November 1966 which is the date that the city of Patras celebrates its patron "Saint Andrew". This is the reason that the emblem of the University is an X cross which symbolises the one on which St. Andrew was crucified.


== Academic profile ==
The University consists of five Schools, 24 departments with undergraduate study programs leading to a degree.
Furthermore, the University of Patras offers Postgraduate programs, as well as Digital and Open Courses.


== Research ==
In its 161 laboratories, research is conducted by students and teaching staff members.Apart from regular teaching and research activities, the laboratories are the focal points for the creation of national and international research consortia. The university participates in all major European research programmes such as ESPRIT, EURECA, RACE, LRE, BRITE-EURAM, IMPACT, LIFE, ENVIRONMENT, COPERNICUS, FAIR, STRIDE, BIOMED and other programmes sponsored by the D6XII, D6XVI, D6XIII Directorates.
The management of research projects is carried out by the Research Committee and its administration unit. The financial management of research projects with external funding produces resources for the University, which are used for specific educational and developmental activities, as well as funding of researchers. In recent years, over 2700 research projects, financed both by the State and the European Union have been carried out.


== Academic evaluation ==
An external evaluation of all academic departments in Greek universities was conducted by the Hellenic Quality Assurance and Accreditation Agency (HQA). In 2015 the external evaluation committee gave University of Patras a Positive evaluation.


== Location and Campus ==

The university on the Campus of Patras and in the city of Agrinio.The campus of Patras is located next to the University Regional General Hospital of Patras, in the suburb Rion, which is 7 km (4.3 mi) North East of the City of Patras within the Municipality of Patras. It is a self-contained campus located at the foot of mount Panachaiko with a view over the Gulf of Corinth and the mountains of Central Greece across the water.The School of Medicine lies west of the hospital but smaller in size with the parking lots in the west and downtown Rio, and a river with Papandreou Avenue in its southwest. The university is accessible by GR-8A, and by the bypass (perimeter highway) with an interchange in the west and a westbound interchange in the northeast. The elevation is around 50 m (160 ft) above sea level. The facilities lie in the western part, the central part and the northern part. The far western part, and the eastern part are empty.
The campus has four entrances; the Platonos Entrance Eisodos Platonos, the Dionysios Solomos Entrance Eisodos Dionysiou Solomou, lying to the west next to Papandreou Avenue which is also a road linking to Kastritsi, Georgios Seferis Entrance Eisodos Georgios Seferis in the east and Yianni Ritsou Entrance Eisodos Y. Ritsou with the old GR-8A (Patras - Corinth - Athens) in the north. The mountains are situated in the southeast. The track and field and sporting grounds are in the southern part.
The first buildings of the new university campus were a unit of 20 small ground level pre-fabricated buildings, still housing some academic and administrative offices. In 1972 the construction of buildings "A" and "B" started. Building "A" houses the administrative services, the rectorship, the Senate's Conference Hall, the University's Ceremonial Hall, a teaching amphitheatre and seminar halls.Following the master plan, 25 buildings were built, and many more are under construction for the housing of most of the departments, along with a library, a museum of science and technology, a Botanical Garden, and a Student Centre. Within the campus are the students' residence hall, the Conference and Cultural Centre, a restaurant, a bank, a bookstore, a stationery, the Publishing House, cafeterias and kiosks. The University Guest Hall is the only building of the university outside the campus. It is located three kilometres west of the campus. The total number of lecture halls in the different building units is 115. In November 2018 it was announced, that the Region of Western Greece will fund the complete renovation and reconstruction of 20 amphitheatres and lecture halls of the university.
Within the campus there is also the General University Hospital of Patras which functions both as the major regional medical centre and as a teaching facility for the Faculty of Medicine. Several other facilities are available on campus including a gymnasium and a swimming pool (not in operation as of April 2018) , a nursery school, a primary and secondary school for the children of faculty and staff, a post office. In addition to constructing new buildings, new sites at the surroundings have been appropriated on behalf of the university.Today, buildings of a total area of 210,100 m2 have been completed and are functioning.
The university contains:

Academic areas (1 northwest)
School of Engineering / Polytechnic Faculty (central)
School of Economics and Business Administration (south-central)
School of Medicine
School of Sciences (1 central, western and southern part)
University office (south and west)The Municipality of Agrinio is the link connecting Aitolia and Akarnania and it is one of the largest cities of Western Greece.


== Gallery ==

		
		


== Notable alumni ==
Nikolaos Bourbakis, computer scientist known for his work in image processing. (Electrical and Computer Engineering)
Christos Laskaris, Greek poet awarded with the Cavafy International Award in Cairo in 2007. (Pedagogy)
Ioannis Liritzis, professor of physics in archaeology (archaeometry) at the University of Henan and the application of natural sciences to archaeology and cultural heritage, awarded with the Prize of Academy of Athens. (Physics)
Stathis Psillos, Greek philosopher of science classified among the 91 most cited living philosophers. (Physics)
Radovan Stojanovic, Montenegrin professor of electrical and computing engineering, known for his work in accelerating science and technology in the Western Balkan and the Mediterranean,


== See also ==
List of universities in Greece
Academic grading in Greece
Bologna Process
Education in Greece
Polytechnic (Greece)
Open access in Greece
University of Patras Formula Student Team – UoP Racing Team


== References ==


== External links ==
University of Patras – Official website (in Greek) (in English)
Hellenic Quality Assurance and Accreditation Agency (HQA) (in Greek)
University of Patras Internal Quality Assurance Unit (in Greek)
Greek Research & Technology Network (GRNET) (in English) (in Greek)
Kallipos (e-books Greek academic publishing) (in English) (in Greek)