Title: Panamerican University
Aspects: {'U of P'}

The Panamerican University (Spanish: Universidad Panamericana), commonly known as UP or “mexican Harvard”, is a private Catholic university founded in Mexico City. It has four campuses: the main Mixcoac campus in the Benito Juarez borough of northern Mexico City, founded in 1968; the Guadalajara campus established in 1981; the Aguascalientes campus established in 1989; and Campus Santa Fe, also in Mexico City, founded in 2011.


== History ==
UP was founded in 1967 as a business school. A group of wealthy businessmen and academics gave life to the Panamerican Institute for Executive Business Management (Instituto Panamericano de Alta Dirección de Empresas), later they promoted the creation of a university. The Panamerican Institute of Humanities (Instituto Panamericano de Humanidades- IPH), founded in 1968, merged with the IPADE and created the Panamerican University. It was all done under the spiritual direction of Opus Dei, a personal prelature of the Catholic Church.
In 1978, the IPH was given University rank and took the name Panamerican University (Universidad Panamericana), even though the IPADE and IPH conceived from their origins the universal and unitarian knowledge.
The new university began with only two programs, Pedagogy and Administration. During the 1970s new programs were added, including Law and Philosophy (1970), Economics and Business Administration (1977), and Industrial Engineering (1978). Further new programs were added in the 1980s and 1990s, including Electromechanic Engineering, Accountancy (1981), Informatics, Marketing, International Business, Finance (1993), and Medicine (1996).


=== Motto and Coat of Arms ===
Ubi spiritus, libertas (Where the spirit is, there is freedom) is the university's motto, it synthesizes the educational philosophy. Love of freedom in a space where the human spirit is cultivated: therefore, love of authentic freedom.
The University's arms is formed by two elements: The red square and the blue band on the golden left side, which represent the coat of arms used by Christopher Columbus when he landed in the Americas; they symbolize Pan-Americanism.
On the right side, on top of a golden bottom, there's an Oak, symbol of strength. Its roots are the diverse sources of integral development; the four ramifications symbolize the Cardinal Virtues: Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance; the leaves and acorns represent the rest of the virtues, which derive of the fundamental four.


== Schools and Faculties ==
Currently, the university has 17 undergraduate academic programs, depending on 5 Schools and 3 Faculties. This includes Licenciaturas and Ingenierías (equivalent to BA, BSc and LLB).

School of Institutions Administration
School of Health Sciences
School of Economic and Administrative Sciences
School of Communication
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Philosophy
Faculty of Pedagogy
Open University [1]The University is also in charge of the Preparatoria Universidad Panamericana (Panamerican University Highschool), a high school with the same educational principles. It has two distinct campuses one for boys and another for girls, called Yaocalli.


== Undergraduate Degrees ==
The Panamerican University, at its headquarters (Mixcoac), currently has 23 degree programs in various fields of study.

Health Sciences.
Nursing
Surgeon
PsychologyBusiness
Administration and finance
Administration and Marketing
Management and International Business
Administration and Human Resources
AccountancyCommunication
CommunicationEngineering
Animation and Video Games Engineering
Engineering in Innovation and Design
Information Technology and Intelligent Systems Engineering
Industrial Engineering and Innovation Management
Mechanical Engineering
Mechatronics EngineeringESDAI
Administration and HospitalityPedagogy
PedagogyPhilosophy
PhilosophyEconomy and Government
Economy
GovernmentAdministration and Management
Administration and Management (Business & Management)Fine arts
Music and Innovation


== Accreditations ==
ABET (Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology)
CENEVAL (Centro Nacional para la Evaluación de la Educación Superior)
ENARM (Examen Nacional de Aspirantes a Residencias Médicas)


== Reputation ==
For more information see the IPADE Rankings.


== International Programs ==
For several years, the university has offered several exchange agreements with the following universities (among others):

Fachhochschule Schmalkalden
University of Lethbridge
University of Navarra
University of Westminster
University of Exeter
Université de Montréal
Bond University
Dalhousie University
European Business School International University Schloss Reichartshausen
Shanghai Normal University


== Faculty ==
See Category:Universidad Panamericana facultyCarlos Abascal
Eduardo Charpenel
Eduardo Ferrer MacGregor
Francisco de Rosenzweig Mendialdua
Hector Zagal
Leonardo Polo
Miguel Alessio Robles
Sergio Salvador Aguirre Anguiano


== Notable alumni ==
See Category:Universidad Panamericana alumniPoliticians

Enrique Peña Nieto (L.L.B.), 57th President of Mexico (2012-)
Miguel Alonso Reyes (L.L.B.), Governor of Zacatecas (2010-)
César Nava Vázquez (L.L.B.),  President of the National Action Party (2009-2010); Representative for Mexico City (2009-2012); Personal Secretary to the President (2006-2008)Academic

Arturo Damm - Economist.
Víctor Isolino Doval - Satirist
Hernany Veytia - Lawyer.
Alfredo Reyes Krafft - TIC Lawyer
Hector Zagal - Philosopher and writer.
José Manuel Rivera Montes de Oca - Mathematician
Claudio de Jesús Pita Ruiz Velasco
Reynaldo Vizcarra Torres- Public figure


== Honoris Causa degrees ==
Some of the Honoris Causa degrees awarded by the UP include:

Kim B. Clark, American economist.


== Affiliated schools ==
Universidad Panamericana Preparatoria (senior high school)


== Controversy ==
Mexican journalist Carmen Aristegui published a series of reports on alleged plagiarism found in the thesis entitled "The Mexican presidentialism and Alvaro Obregon" from the current President of Mexico Enrique Peña Nieto, to obtain a degree in law at Panamerican University.The university informed their community that a group of "distinguished members" would make an analysis of this thesis and issued an institutional statement dated August 28 informing that the graduating procedure of Enrique Peña Nieto complied with the requirements back in the year 1991 and the thesis of his own presents both original ideas and ideas from other authors treated in five different ways:
• Textual fragment reproduction of previously published works according to academic standards.
• Textual fragment reproduction without quotes or footer section of the literature.
• Support Reproductions in which there is no quoted footnote reference but in the reference section.
• Textual reproduction in which credit is given to the author of ambiguous or imprecise manner.
• Cases in which credit is given to the original author, but not the source from which the quotation was taken.In the same statement the Law Faculty reports that proceeded to search rules that allow a proper response to a discovery of this nature and concluded that:
1) This is an unprecedented case in which there are no provisions in the applicable regulatory bodies titration procedure, a technical consultation to the National Autonomous University of Mexico was asked to confirm in writing this criterion.
2) The General Regulations from that institution does not apply to former students.
3) It is a consummated act on which it is impossible to proceed in any way.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website in Spanish