Title: Green Line "C" Branch
Aspects: {'C Train'}

The "C" Branch, also called the Beacon Street Line or Cleveland Circle Line, is one of four branches of the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority's Green Line light rail system in the Boston, Massachusetts metropolitan area. The line begins at Cleveland Circle in the Brighton neighborhood of Boston and runs on the surface through Brookline along the median of Beacon Street. Reentering Boston, the line goes underground through the St. Marys Street Incline and joins the "B" and "D" Branches at Kenmore. Trains run through the Boylston Street Subway to Copley where the "E" Branch joins, then continue through the Tremont Street Subway to downtown Boston. As of 2017, the "C" Branch terminates at North Station; further service to Lechmere is provided by the "E" Branch.


== Traffic signals ==

The "C" branch runs on a dedicated median on Beacon Street in Brookline, with a total of 18 grade crossings at major cross streets. Like on its sister "B" branch, "C" branch streetcars must stop on traffic signals at street crossings. The signals on Beacon Street in Brookline could in theory be prioritized to make the Green Line run faster. However, the MBTA, which would be expected to pay for the streetcar sensors, does not consider the project to be cost-effective. In 2007, the Boston Globe published letters from riders who are in favor of these sensors, a letter from the MBTA spokesperson arguing that a major study is needed before the MBTA spends money, and a letter arguing that the T's spokesperson is giving too many excuses.In January 2008, the MBTA hired a consultant to study the issue. As of 2011, the Town of Brookline was considering formally asking the MBTA to cooperate in setting up traffic signal prioritization to speed up Green Line trains on Beacon Street.In Mayor Marty Walsh's "Go Boston 2030" plan, prioritizing traffic signals on Beacon Street was a proposed idea. The plan indicated that the project is planned to be completed within five years.


== History ==

The first tracks on Beacon Street were laid in 1888, running from Massachusetts Avenue west to Coolidge Corner. The next year the rest of the line to Cleveland Circle opened, with access to the Reservoir Carhouse. In 1889, the first electric streetcar route (see Green Line "A" Branch) used Beacon Street from Coolidge Corner east to Massachusetts Avenue, then ran south on Massachusetts Avenue and east on Boylston Street to Park Square. That same year the line on Beacon Street to Cleveland Circle was electrified.
Another connection to the Beacon Street line was provided at Washington Square; streetcars came from Brookline Village along Washington Street and turned west on Beacon Street. This line was later extended north on Chestnut Hill Avenue and west on Commonwealth Avenue to Boston College and was the predecessor of the 65 bus route.
On September 1, 1897, the Tremont Street Subway opened and then or soon after Beacon Street service began to run into it via the Boylston Street Portal at the Public Garden, turning around at Park Street. On October 3, 1914, the Boylston Street Subway extended the underground portion to the Kenmore Incline just east of Kenmore Square, and the underground Kenmore and the St. Marys Street Incline extended it west on October 23, 1932.
Until 1967, when it was named the "C" Branch, the Beacon Street route had the map number 61.
Beacon Street service was extended from Park Street to Lechmere on February 7, 1931. Since then, Beacon Street service has had the following east terminals:
November 20, 1961: cut back from Lechmere to North Station all but Sundays
March 25, 1967: extended to Lechmere all times
June–September 1968: cut back to Government Center Sundays, restored to Lechmere afterwards
March 21, 1980: cut back to Government Center all but rush hours
June 21, 1980: extended to Lechmere all times
April 4, 1981: cut back to Park Street
June 26, 1982: extended to Government Center
July 30, 1983: extended to North Station
March 28, 1997: cut back to Government Center
January 1, 2005: extended to North StationAs of 2016, regular C service terminates at North Station.


== Station listing ==


== References ==


== External links ==

MBTA - Green Line "C" Branch