Title: Anti-Corruption Resource Centre
Aspects: {'U4'}

The Anti-Corruption Resource Centre (U4) was established in 2002 and is targeted at donor
practitioners who wish to effectively address corruption
challenges in their work. U4 offers focused
research products and a rich array of online
resources. 
The Anti-Corruption Resource Centre is based at the Chr. Michelsen Institute in Bergen, Norway. The Resource Centre works in collaboration with Transparency International,  Tiri and many other international organisations and NGOs.
The international development agencies of the following countries are the current U4 Partners:

UK: Department for International Development (DFID)
Norway: Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad)
Sweden: Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency  (Sida)
Germany: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ), BMZ, KfW
The Netherlands: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Canada: Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)[The Resource centre was previously referred to as the 'Utstein Anti-Corruption Resource Centre', as it originally stems from the now defunct 'Utstein' collaboration started in 1999 between the ministers of international development of the UK, Norway, The Netherlands, and Germany]


== Theme pages developed for a donor audience ==
UN Convention against Corruption: A one-stop site on the UNCAC for development practitioners. Includes briefing documents, Expert Answers, examples of donor support for implementation, and selected literature.
Public Financial Management: Issue pages on corruption and direct budget support, corruption and revenue administration, and corruption and the budget process.
Corruption in the Health Sector: A comprehensive overview of the relevant issues (causes and consequences, financial resources management, medical supplies, health worker / patient interaction, salaries, and more).
Corruption in the Education Sector: Resources on the challenges posed by corruption in the education sector with a focus on development co-operation and implementation of aid projects.
Corruption in Emergencies: Includes resources on risk mapping, the role of the media, selected literature, and more. Soon available: Corruption and procurement in emergencies.
Donor Coordination: Case studies, country- and donor factors, possibilities and practicalities, further resources, etc.
Knowledge Management for Anti-Corruption: Summary note looking at the problems, perspectives and prospects. Links to further resources and background materials.
African Anti-Corruption Commissions: Studies of ACCs in five African countries (Ghana, Uganda, Tanzania, Malawi and Zambia).
Anti-Corruption Conventions: An overview of conventions, their scope and powers.
 Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys: Can PETS be a tool for tackling corruption?
Political Corruption: Definitions, cases, the challenges and options, and a literature overview.


== Selected literature database ==
An updated collection of direct links to the most
relevant anti-corruption readings for
practitioners.  This includes brief descriptions of more than 300 titles.


== Expert Answers ==
More than 100 previous expert answers to U4 Partner staff's corruption-related questions are
available publicly online for anyone to
read, and more new answers are added regularly. This service is oberated by Transparency International’s
secretariat in Berlin.


== External links ==
Anti-Corruption Resource Centre (U4)