Title: University of Mumbai
Aspects: {'UAF'}

The University of Mumbai (also known by its former name University of Bombay, the official name until 1997, or Bombay University), informally known as (MU), is one of the earliest state universities in India and the oldest in Maharashtra. It offers bachelors, masters and Doctoral courses, as well as diplomas and certificates in many disciplines like the Arts, commerce, Science, Medical and Engineering. The language of instruction for most courses is English. 
The University of Mumbai was established in 1857. The university has two campuses across Mumbai (Kalina Campus and Fort Campus) and two outside Mumbai, one of them being Thane Sub Campus. The Fort campus carries out administrative work only. Several institutes in Mumbai previously affiliated to the university are now autonomous institutes or universities. 
The University of Mumbai is one of the largest universities in the world. In 2011, the total number of enrolled students was 549,432. The university in 2013 had 711 affiliated colleges.


== History ==

In accordance with "Wood's despatch", drafted by Sir Charles Wood in 1854, The University of Bombay was established in 1857 after presentation of a petition from the Bombay Association to the British colonial government in India. The University of Mumbai was modeled on similar universities in the United Kingdom, specifically the University of London.The first departments established were the Faculty of Arts at Elphinstone College in 1835 and the Faculty of Medicine at Grant Medical College in 1845. Both colleges existed before the university was founded and surrendered their degree-granting privileges to the university. The first degrees awarded in 1862 were Bachelor of Arts and Licentiate in Medicine.Initially, the Town Hall in Mumbai was used as the university's offices.
Cornelia Sorabji, who later studied law at Somerville College becoming Oxford's first female law student and India's first female advocate, was the university's first female graduate in 1888.Until 1904, the university only conducted examinations, awarded affiliations to colleges, developed curricula and produced guidelines for colleges developing curricula. Teaching departments, research disciplines and post-graduate courses were introduced from 1904 and several additional departments were established. After India achieved independence in 1947, the functions and powers of the university were re-organised under The Bombay University Act of 1953.  The name of the University was changed from University of Bombay to University of Mumbai in 1996.In 1949, student enrollment was 42,272 with 80 affiliated colleges. By 1975, these numbers had grown to 156,190 and 114 respectively.


== Campuses ==


=== Kalina Campus ===
The Kalina campus in suburban Mumbai covers an area of 93 hectares (230 acres) and houses graduate training and research centres. Departments offering courses in the sciences, technology, commerce, and humanities are located here. Most colleges of engineering and medicine affiliated to the University of Mumbai, though, are privately owned. The university does not have its own engineering or medicine departments.
Centres and institutes located in the Kalina Campus include:

Examination House, also known as Mahatma Jyotirao Phule Bhavan houses the office of the Controller of Examinations. Centralized assessment of answer books for various departments is carried out in a separate four-storey annex. Examination processes were made more efficient by the introduction of online delivery of question papers for examinations, and assessment of answer books by scanning at remote examination centers. The academic depository of the university was started in collaboration with CDSL in 2015. The university is the first university in the country to start an academic depository. 
National Centre for Nanosciences and Nanotechnology — a research facility
Department of Biophysics — the only such department in western India
Jawaharlal Nehru Library
Garware Institute of Career Education and Development, whose courses include medical transcription and management courses such as agriculture business management, pharma management and tourism management
MAST (मस्त) FM, the campus radio station of the university operating at 107.8 MHz frequency modulation
Alkesh Dinesh Mody Numismatic Museum which houses displays of currency from around the world
Alkesh Dinesh Mody Institute for Financial and Management Studies (ADMI) which offers BMS, MFSM and MMS programmes
Department of Extra Mural Studies which conducts weekend courses in many disciples including astronomy, astrophysics, plant and animal taxonomy, hobby robotics, and hobby electronics
The Institute of Distance and Open Learning (IDOL) which offers courses in humanities, sciences, commerce, computer science, and information technology
Western Regional Instrumentation Centre (WRIC) — a research and training facility for instrumentation engineering and science
Centre for African Studies
Centre for Eurasian Studies
A rose garden where more than a hundred varieties of rose have been cultivated
Marathi Bhasha Bhavan Centre which conducts academic and cultural activities associated with the Marathi language


=== Thane Campus ===
The Thane Campus, established in 2014, spans an area of 2.4 ha (6 acres) and is a modern, two-storey complex. It houses administrative offices, the School of Law, University of Mumbai and also undertakes management courses.


=== Fort Campus ===
The University of Bombay was established in 1857 at the Fort campus, which is located near the southern end of Mumbai island. It houses the administrative division of the university on a 5.3 ha (13 acres) site. It has 116,000 m2 (1.25×10^6 sq ft) of built-up area, 2,000 m2 (22,000 sq ft) of classrooms, and 7,800 m2 (84,000 sq ft) of laboratory space. There are two post-graduate centres, 354 affiliated colleges, and 36 departments. It is built in the Gothic style and the Rajabai Clock Tower stands on the lawns of the campus.


==== Rajabai Clock Tower ====

One of Mumbai's landmarks, the Rajabai Clock Tower was completed in the 1870s and houses the University of Mumbai's library. Sir George Gilbert Scott modeled the Rajabai Clock Tower on the clock tower of the Palace of Westminster in London. Local businessman Premchand Roychand contributed to the cost of construction and named the tower in memory of his mother, Rajabai. The tower is 85 m (280 ft) tall and has five storeys. At a height of 9.1 m (30 ft) from the ground, there are eight statues representing the Indian castes. The tower clock is reported to have played 16 tunes including Rule, Britannia. On the initiative of the then Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Rajan Welukar, the first phase of restoration of Rajabai Clock Tower started in 2013 and was completed in May 2015. Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) gave a Rs 4 crore grant for this phase of the restoration project.


=== Ratnagiri Campus ===
This minor campus, running mostly extramural courses, is located in the town of Ratnagiri.


== Faculties and departments ==
The University of Mumbai has several hundred affiliated colleges offering undergraduate and post-graduate education, and conducting research in areas of science, commerce, arts, engineering, management, law, etc. Each college has its own campus and specialized departments/centres.


=== Prominent institutes ===

Several departments of the University of Mumbai are located away from the three Mumbai campuses. These include the departments of Medicine and Medical Research located in several prominent hospitals in Mumbai, such as the Tata Memorial Hospital, Bombay Hospital and G.S. Medical College and King Edward Memorial Hospital. The Institute of Chemical Technology, then known as the UDCT, was originally an institution of MU, but later gained university status. Tata Memorial Hospital is now affiliated to the Homi Bhabha National Institute.
Similarly, Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute was the first Engineering Institute in the University of Mumbai (1887) and Thadomal Shahani Engineering College was the first Engineering college in the University of Mumbai to start courses in Computer Engineering, Information Technology, Electronics Engineering and Biomedical Engineering. Sardar Patel College of Engineering is another engineering college affiliated to the University .. Further, K.J. Somaiya College of Engineering is additional engineering college affiliated to the University. Along with these, D.Y.Patil's Ramrao Adik Institute of Technology & SIES Graduate School of Technology are also affiliated to the University of Mumbai.
The Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies was established in 1965 in collaboration with Stanford Graduate School of Business of Stanford University. Sophia College for Women was established in 1941.


== Libraries ==

Jawaharlal Nehru Library (JNL) is the central library, located on the campus at Kalina. As of May 2019, it desperately needs restoration .
The technology and applied research journals and books of the University of Mumbai are kept in the libraries of the Institute of Chemical Technology, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies and Tata Memorial Hospital.


== Sports ==
The university's cricket team is the most successful in the Rohinton Baria Trophy, with 28 wins.


== Vice-Chancellors ==


== Notable alumni ==


== Ranking ==
Internationally, the University of Mumbai ranked 801–1000 by the QS World University Rankings of 2018, 181 in Asia and 82 among BRICS nations.The National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) ranked it in the 151–200 band among universities in India in 2018.


== Partner universities ==
Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) have been signed with University of Amsterdam, University of Bath, Liverpool Hope University, Ryerson University, IESEG School of Management, Kühne Logistics University, Tianjin University of Technology, Nankai University in China and Edith Cowan University in Australia.


== See also ==
List of universities in India
Universities and colleges in India
List of universities by number of billionaire alumni
Education in India


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website