Title: Universidad Autónoma de Santo Domingo
Aspects: {'UASD'}

See also Universidad Santo Tomás de Aquino

The Universidad Autónoma de Santo Domingo (UASD) (Autonomous University of Santo Domingo) is the public university system in the Dominican Republic with its flagship campus in the Ciudad Universitaria of Santo Domingo and with regional campuses in many cities of the Republic. It was founded by Jose Gabriel Garcia and Emiliano Tejera in 1866 as the Professional Institute, replacing the former Universidad Santo Tomás de Aquino, one of the first universities of the Western Hemisphere (Americas), which was founded unofficially by a Papal bull in 1538, officially by royal decree in 1558, and closed in 1822. It was later renamed University of Santo Domingo in 1914.
In structure, the school followed the model of the University of Alcalá de Henares.  The university organized its offerings into four schools: Medicine, Law, Theology, and the Arts. Today, the University has expanded to eight schools: Humanities, the Arts, Law and Political Science, Health Sciences, Economics and Social Sciences, Science, Engineering and Architecture, and Agricultural Sciences.


== History ==

The University traces its foundations to a Dominican seminary established in 1538. This was raised to the status of a university by the Papal Bull In Apostolatus Culmine, issued by Pope Paul III on 28 October 1538, and granted the same rights and powers as the Spanish University of Alcalá de Henares. It was initially organised in four faculties, following the pattern of medieval European universities: Theology, Law, Medicine and Arts.In 1801, the university was suspended due to the Haitian occupation; it reopened in 1815 after Spanish colonial rule was restored under the rectorship of Dr José Núñez de Cáceres. However, it was forced to close again in 1822 due to the conscription of its students. After the Dominican Republic was established in 1844, an attempt to reopen the university was made by President Pedro Santana in 1859, but this was unsuccessful.In 1866 the Instituto Profesional (Professional Institute) was created by Jose Gabriel Garcia and Emiliano Tejera in Santo Domingo, providing higher education in the city. This was closed in 1891 but reopened in 1895. On 16 November 1914, President Ramón Báez (who was also rector of the Institute) raised it to university status under the name "University of Santo Domingo". This new university was forced to close by the US occupation from 1916 to 1924. After the start of the dictatorship of Rafael Leonidas Trujillo in 1930, the university was unable to operate independently; it was only on 31 December 1961, after Trujillo's death, that a law was passed restoring its autonomy.


== Faculties ==


=== Humanities ===
The Humanities Faculty is formed of the Schools of Social Communication, Philosophy and Anthropology, History, Foreign Language, Literature and Psychology Schools.

The authorities for the period 2008–2011 are:

Dean: Prof. Rafael Morla de la Cruz
Deputy Dean: Prof. Amelia Milagros Salas
Director of Social Communication School: Prof. Patricio Jovanny Matos
Director of Philosophy School: Prof. Francisco Acosta
Director of History and Anthropology School: Prof. Dioris O. Antigua Correa
Director of Literature School: Prof. Ramón Morel Félix
Director of Pedagogy School: Prof. Maestro Víctor Encarnación
Director of Psychology School: Prof. Yosijo Docar Ajitas
Director of Professional Orientention School: Lic. Irenes López Severino
Director of Foreign language School: Prof. Ramón E. Rodríguez Espinal
Director of Postgraduate education:


=== Agronomy and Veterinary Sciences ===

The Agronomy and Veterinary Sciences Faculty is formed of the Schools of Agronomic Engineering, Zootechnics and Veterinary Science Schools.


=== Laws and Political Sciences ===
The Law and Political Science Faculty is formed of the Schools of Law and Political Science Schools.
The Law and Political Science Faculty award the titles of Licentiate in Law and Licentiate in Political Science; the latter has three majors: Internationals Studies, Socioeconomics Studies and Internationals Relationship. The Criminology Institute is a part of the Faculty.


=== Economics and Social Sciences ===
By Law 4412 of 24 March 1956 the University Organization Law of 21 October 1937 was modified, adding the Economics and Commerce Faculty to the existing faculties.  The new faculty would award the degrees of Licentiate in Commercial Science and Doctor in Economics and Commercial Science.
At the same time, Law 4413 decreed that the four courses "of the second cycle of the Superior School of Accountant Technician, established by the decree 2383... were assigned to the Economics and Commerce Faculty of the Santo Domingo University from 12 October 1956, under the name of Commercial Science Department".

The Law 4439 dated 4 May 1956 changed the name of the "Economics and Commerce Faculty" to the "Economics, Finance and Commerce Faculty". This same law authorized to the graduates of the Superior School of Accountant Technician, with the title of Accountant Technician "provides them with licence to practice the profession of Authorized Public Accountant  and carry the title in Commercial Science and allows them to opt for the Doctorate in Commercial Science by the presentation of a thesis, following the regulation dictated by the University Council".
In 1960, Law 5130 changed the "Economics, Finance and Commerce Faculty" to the "Economic Science Faculty" and included the Public Administration School. The Organic statute approved by the University Cloister in 1966, gave the faculty with its current name of the "Economics and Social Sciences Faculty".
Currently, the Economics and Social Sciences Faculty is formed of the Schools of Economics, Accountant, Statistics, Sociology, Marketing and Administration Schools.
The authorities for the period 2008–2011 are:

Dean: Prof. Juan Antonio Cerda Luna
Deputy Dean: Prof. Ramón Desangles
Director of Economics School: Prof. Melvin Pérez Sarraf
Director of Administration School: Prof. Alixis Martínez
Director of Marketing School: Prof. José Antonio Burgos
Director of Accountant School: Prof. Norberto Hernández
Director of Statistic School: Prof. Francisco Roa Familia
Director of Sociology School: Prof. Marisela Duval Pérez
Director of Postgraduate:


=== Engineering and Architecture ===
The Engineering and Architecture Faculty is formed of the Schools of Architecture, Electromechanics Engineering, Civil Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Surveying and Industrial Engineering Schools.


=== Sciences ===
The Science Faculty is constituted of the Schools of Biology, Geographic Science, Physics, Mathematics, Microbiology and Parasitology, Chemistry and Computing Schools.


=== Health Sciences ===
The Health Sciences Faculty formed of the Schools of Pharmacy, Imaging, Infirmary, Odontology, Bioanalysis, Medicine, Public Health, Nursing, Physiology and Morphology Schools.


=== The Arts ===
The Arts Faculty is formed of the Schools of Criticism and History of Art, Publicity, Theater, Music, Film, Television and Photography, Industrial Design and Fashion and Plastic Arts Schools.


== University authorities, 2011–2014 ==
Rector: Dr. Ivan Grullóne.
Educational vice-rector: Dr. Jorge Asjanna David.
Vice-rector of Research and Postgraduates: Ma. Francisco Vegazoe.
Administrative vice rector: Ma. Emma Polanko.
Vice-rector of Extension: Ma. Francisco Terrero Galararza.


== Notable Faculty ==
Federico Henriquez y Carvajal
Maria Ugarte
Julio Ortega Frier
Max Henriquez Urena
Eugenio Maria de Hostos
Carlos Nouel


== Notable alumni ==
Former Instituto Profesional (1866-1914)

Americo Lugo, historian and writer
Fabio Fiallo, diplomat, writer, poet
Alejandro Woss y Gil, president of the Dominican Republic
Francisco Henriquez y Carvajal, president of the Dominican Republic
Dario Contreras, doctor
Federico Aybar, doctor and politician
Francisco Eugenio Moscoso Puello, scientist and writer
Gustavo Mejia Ricart, writer
Narciso Alberti y Bosch, doctor
Emilio Prud’Homme, writer of the National Anthem
Evangelina Rodriguez, first Dominican female doctor
Francisco Peynado, lawyer and politician
Manuel de Jesus Troncoso de la Concha, president of the Dominican Republic
Luis Manuel Betances Cohen, surgeon and hematologist
Manuel de Jesus Galvan, writerUniversity of Santo Domingo (1914–present)

Frank Moya Pons, historian
Pedro Mir, writer
Fernando Perez Memen, author and professor
Alfonso Rodriguez, film director
Abel Gonzalez Massenet, doctor
Julio Hazim, doctor
Geovanny Vicente Romero, lawyer and political analyst
Leonel Fernandez, president of the Dominican Republic
Salvador Jorge Blanco, president of the Dominican Republic
Joaquin Balaguer, president of the Dominican Republic
Roberto Cassa, writer and historian
Renee Klang de Guzman, first Dominican first lady
Minerva Mirabal, lawyer and activist
Franklin Dominguez, playwright
Marisela Alvarez, television show host and architect
Donald Reid Cabral, politician and lawyer
Rene Fortunato, filmmaker
Viriato Fiallo, doctor and politician
Freddy Beras Goico, television show host and comedian
Fernando Luna Calderon, scientist
Pedro Borrell, architect
Hector Garcia Godoy, president of the Dominican Republic
Leopoldo Minaya, writer
Juan Luis Guerra, musician
Marcio Veloz Maggiolo, archaeologist and anthropologist
Jose del Castillo Pichardo, sociologist
Elsa Núñez, artist


== References ==


== External links ==
UASD Website (in Spanish)
Dominican Republic Student & University Guide