Title: Canadian Soccer League
Aspects: {'C-League (disambiguation)'}

The Canadian Soccer League (CSL; French: Ligue canadienne de soccer — LCS) is a semi-professional league for exclusively Canadian association soccer clubs primarily located in the province of Ontario, and is the successor league to the Canadian National Soccer League (CNSL). It is a Non-FIFA league previously sanctioned by the Canadian Soccer Association (CSA), but now affiliated with the Soccer Federation of Canada (SFC). As of 2019, it consists of 16 teams all located in Ontario, and is divided into two divisions, the First Division and Second Division. The season runs from May to October, with most games played on the weekend followed by a playoff format to determine the overall champion.
The league was formed in 1998 as the Canadian Professional Soccer League (CPSL) by an alliance forged by the Ontario Soccer Association (OSA) with the Canadian National Soccer League in order to implement the Image of the Game Report by creating the link between the provincial senior leagues to the top North American clubs, and provide opportunities for the development of players, coaches, and referees. The intention of the alliance was to form regional divisions across the nation under the CPSL banner with each divisional champion competing in a playoff format for the championship.Thirteen clubs have won the CSL Championship: Toronto Croatia (9 times including CNSL titles), St. Catharines Wolves (5 including CNSL titles), Serbian White Eagles (3 including CNSL titles), York Region Shooters (3), Brampton Hitmen, Brantford Galaxy, FC Vorkuta, Oakville Blue Devils, Ottawa Wizards, Scarborough SC, SC Waterloo Region, Toronto Olympians, and Trois-Rivieres Attak.


== Competition format ==


=== League competition ===
There are a total of 16 clubs in the Canadian Soccer League. Traditionally during the course of a league season teams usually played a balanced schedule of 18 or 22 games from April/May through October/November with the top eight ranked teams advancing to the playoffs. As of recent seasons a balanced schedule of 14 games has been played. Each match sees the winning team awarded three points, or in the case of a draw, the teams receive one point each. No points are awarded for a loss. At the end of each season, the club with the most points is crowned the regular season champion.
The playoffs operate as a one match quarterfinal, followed by a one-game semi-final for the four surviving teams and a one-game final to crown the CSL Champions.There is no automatic promotion and relegation between the First and Second Division. Club members of the CSL vote to determine which, if any, applications for admission into the league will be permitted.


=== Cup competition ===
The Canadian Soccer League previously organized a knock-out cup competition known as the Open Canada Cup (formerly known as the Government of Canada Open Cup for sponsorship reasons) each league season. The competition was originally formed in 1998 known as the League Cup, and was exclusively open only to CPSL clubs. As the Canadian Soccer Association and other provincial governing bodies failed to organize a tournament for providing a candidate for the CONCACAF Champions' Cup the league attempted a solution to the problem. In 2003, the CPSL opened the League Cup to all Canadian professional and amateur clubs in order to provide a potential Canadian candidate to the continental tournament. The competition was renamed with the Government of Canada as the initial title sponsorship, and the inclusion of a $10,000 reward for the champion.The Open Canada Cup eventually expanded to include professional and amateur teams from Ontario, Quebec, and British Columbia. A notable addition was the Toronto Lynx of the USL First Division at the time the nations top tier division joining the tournament in 2006. In 2008, the CSL increased the prize money to $25,000, but shortly after the creation of the Canadian Championship the competition was disbanded. Since the establishment of the Canadian Championship no CSL teams have participated in the tournament which determines the Canadian entry into the CONCACAF Champions League.


== History ==


=== Origins and establishment (1993–98) ===

After the demise of the Canadian Soccer League (CSL) in 1992 Canada was without a Division I national professional league. The Canadian soccer landscape was fractured into several different foreign and regional senior leagues. When the CSL ceased operations three of their clubs the Vancouver Whitecaps, Toronto Blizzard, and Montreal Supra joined the American Professional Soccer League, which at the time constituted as the highest tier league in the Canadian soccer structure. While the remaining clubs with the exception of London Lasers joined the National Soccer League (NSL) the country's oldest and only exclusively Canadian professional league. After the addition of the Winnipeg Fury it changed its name to the Canadian National Soccer League (CNSL).
Though the CNSL was primarily based in Ontario it operated as a private league for several years after a heated dispute with the Ontario Soccer Association (OSA). While other provinces operated with a top senior amateur league Ontario had its own senior league, but was without a sanctioned professional league for its amateur players as the CNSL was considered an outlaw league by the OSA. As a result, the OSA completed a study named the Image of the Game in 1995/1996, which led to the plans of launching the Ontario Professional Soccer League as a Division III league in the Canadian soccer league system. As the OSA failed to bring their project to fruition they settled their differences with the CNSL and formed an alliance to launch the Canadian Professional Soccer League (CPSL) beginning with an Ontario division.The CPSL would serve as the link between the provincial senior leagues to the USL A-League/USISL clubs, and provide opportunities for the development of youth players and referees. The intention of the league was to form regional divisions under the CPSL banner with each divisional champion competing in a playoff format for the championship. Michael Di Biase the CNSL president would serve as the commissioner, and OSA administrator Bill Spiers was named the league's chairman. The founding members included four CNSL clubs London City, North York Astros, St. Catharines Wolves, Toronto Croatia, and four of the OPSL teams Glen Shields, Mississauga Eagles, Toronto Olympians, and York Region Shooters. While the remaining CNSL teams like Toronto Italia, Toronto Supra, and Kosovo Albanians failed in successfully applying for membership.


=== Early years (1998–2004) ===
In the initial years of the CPSL the on field performance was dominated by Toronto Olympians, and Ottawa Wizards, who had the financial support from corporations such as Coffee Time, and Oz Optics Ltd. While St. Catharines, and Toronto Croatia two well established former CNSL clubs were the prominent challengers in the early years. A change occurred in 2000 within the administration field of the league with Vince Ursini being appointed the president. The league was able to acquire a television deal with Rogers TV, which enabled the launch of their own television program the CPSL Soccer Show which would subsequently garner the highest ratings of any other Sunday program shown on the channel. As a result, the league earned major sponsorship deals from Primus Canada, and the Government of Canada, which served as the sole sponsor for the CPSL Rookie of the Year Award.In 2001, the CSA originally initiated a task force named the Canadian United Soccer League (CUSL), which formed a working partnership with the CPSL and the Canadian franchises in the USL A-League to forge a unified professional structure in the hopes of forming a Canadian first and second division domestic league. Meanwhile, the CPSL continued in its original mission of providing opportunities to players to a higher platform by striking an agreement with the Toronto Lynx of the USL A-League. The player agreement deal provided the Lynx access in order to use any CPSL talent upon request, which provided the players the opportunity to play at a higher level. Another effort conducted by the league was in 2003 with the opening of their domestic cup the Open Canada Cup to all Canadian professional and amateur clubs in order to provide a potential candidate for the CONCACAF Champions' Cup. The previous time a Canadian club competed in the Champions' Cup was in the 1976 CONCACAF Champions' Cup represented by Toronto Italia in the predecessor league of the CPSL.The league continued in its policy of selective and cautionary approach to team expansion, but witnessed a major expansion run in 2001 which went beyond the GTA and Ontario border to include a Quebec and Ottawa franchise. The following season it expanded to 14 clubs to include a Hamilton and another Toronto territory, due to the increase of teams the CPSL management decided split the league into two Conferences the Eastern and Western.


=== Kaplan years (2005–09) ===

After firmly establishing the league within the Ontario soccer structure, Ursini resigned from his position in order to fully delegate his time to his OSA obligations, and to seek election to the CSA board of directors. Former CPSL management consultant Cary Kaplan with previous experience as president of the Hamilton Bulldogs in the American Hockey League was named his successor in the capacity of a commissioner. One of his first acts was the creation of a Women's Canada Cup, as a preliminary tournament launched in the hopes of creating a future professional domestic league for women. In 2006, Kaplan began a series of reforms beginning with the creation of the National and International Division to replace the conference system. The intention of the reforms was to re-kindle the spirit of the CNSL days by promoting ethnic rivalries to increase match attendance.A re-branding of the name was made to the Canadian Soccer League (CSL) with a new set of rules, regulations and a new constitution was established. The schedule format was changed including the relationship between the OSA and the Quebec Soccer Federation (QSF) was revised with the CSL by the signing of a "Memorandum of Understanding" which provided the CSL with an increased level of autonomy and eventual operational independence from the governing body in 2008. The outcome of the reforms witnessed a 50% increase in match attendance particularly in the GTA with the ethnic based teams attracting the most attention. Fan support would continue to increase for several seasons with the Serbian White Eagles FC, and Trois-Rivières Attak averaging the most. Media coverage was further increased after an arrangement made with Toronto Community News, which provided coverage to the league and its member clubs. While Rogers TV made additional broadcasting commitments to expand their media coverage to a full season.Several milestones were made in the Open Canada Cup tournament with the participation of the Toronto Lynx in 2006, and the expansion of the tournament to include teams from British Columbia in 2007. The CSL began an affiliation in 2007 with the Montreal Impact of the USL First Division by fielding their farm team the Trois-Rivières Attak in the National Division. Toronto FC of the Major League Soccer (MLS) owned by Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment established a relationship with the CSL in 2008 by entering TFC Academy to the National Division, and TFC Academy II to the Reserve Division. As a result, the league at the time had become associated with two of Canada's top three professional soccer franchises by providing a feeder system to the top tier. In 2008, a Reserve Division was formed to build a developmental structure within the CSL in order to provide clubs with a larger player pool, sufficient playing time for injured players to recover, and supply a developmental platform for novice players to make the transition to the professional ranks.On May 12, 2009, the CSL announced that it had received conditional approval for membership with the Canadian Soccer Association (CSA). Thus paving the way for the CSL to create the effective player developmental system needed to provide the missing link between the top provincial amateur level to the MLS/USL on a national level.


=== CSA governance (2010–13) ===
After four and a half years as commissioner, Kaplan resigned following the 2009 season in order to devote more time to his sports marketing company with Domenic Di Gironimo hired as his replacement. In 2010, the CSL was granted full membership in the CSA as a Division III sanctioned professional league in the Canadian soccer structure. Meanwhile, the CSL commissioner was awarded a seat on the CSA Professional Soccer Committee to further the planned expansion of the league to a fully national league with regional divisions under the CSL banner. The league was restructured by combining both the International & National divisions to form the CSL First Division with a single table structure. While the Reserve Division expanded beyond the GTA boundary, and was reorganized in 2011 into the Second Division. Where it continued its traditional support role as a reserve, and entry level division for clubs with limited financial resources to met the standards for a First Division club. A working relationship was struck with newly formed Canadian Academy of Futbol (CAF), which cemented a compete youth structure within the CSL infrastructure with member clubs operating their academy teams in CAF. 
Shortly following the completion of the 2010 season, De Gironimo announced his resignation from the league citing irreconcilable differences. Additional achievements under De Gironimo term was the sponsorship agreement made with Givova which granted the company the naming rights to the league, and to the CSL Championship. Other major sponsorship's included Days Inns – Canada, and a record broadcasting agreement with Rogers TV, which provided additional match coverage to the provinces of Ontario, New Brunswick and Newfoundland. Finally the addition of the Montreal Impact Academy as the second MLS academy club to join the league.Former CPSL president and CSA financial director Vince Ursini returned to the organization as the successor to De Gironimo in 2011. The league's membership under Ursini's administration expanded to record amount of 28 teams in 2012 with 16 in the First Division and 12 in the Second Division. Their media coverage was broaden with a television agreement with CogecoTV, and the reintroduction of their weekly television program was picked up by Rogers TV. On September 12, 2012, accounts of alleged match-fixing was reported by the CBC that a CSL game between the Trois-Rivières Attak and Toronto Croatia held in September 2009 was fixed. The report, which aired on the news program The National, revealed court documents showing that €15,000 ($18,000 CDN) in bribes were paid to several players on Toronto Croatia. The game was part of a larger match-fixing scandal in Europe in which six people were convicted. In response to the allegations of match fixing the CSL issued a statement stating that the league would continue to conduct the necessary steps in order to prevent any future tampering of matches.The 2013 season produced a series of controversial events which initially began with media outlets reporting claims about the CSA decision to no longer sanction the CSL primarily based on the alleged reports of match fixing in the league. Immediately the CSL refuted the claim, and shortly after the CSA unexpectedly de-sanctioned the CSL without due process. The decision was made in order to implement the James Easton Report (Rethink Management Group Report) for the adoption of a new professional soccer structure. As the league was a member in good standing they appealed to the Sport Dispute Resolution Centre of Canada (SDRCC). The sport arbitrator ruled that the CSA had the right to de-sanction the CSL, but ruled that the immediate decisions conducted by the CSA were unreasonable and coercive. The sport arbitrator forced them to reinstate sanctioning to the CSL until the next season in order for the CSA to fairly implement the Easton Report. A notable admission was made by CSA president Victor Montagliani during the SDRCC hearing, where he stated that the decision to de-sanction the CSL was not made on any alleged grounds of match fixing in the CSL but strictly on the decision made by the CSA board of directors to adopt a new soccer structure in Canada.


=== Recent years (2014–present) ===
The league's strained relationship with the CSA continued before the launch of the 2014 season with the CSA expelling the CSL from its membership over alleged violations of rules and regulations in order to make way for alternative structure in Ontario. After failing to specify which rule violations were made and without providing a formal hearing the CSL in response filed litigation against the CSA. As a result, the CSL began its operation as a private league for the first time since the 1997 season in its predecessor league. Though they did join the newly formed Soccer Federation of Canada (SFC), which provided the private soccer entity the services of administration of players, non-playing personnel, match officials and insurance. Despite their ruptured relations the CSL player developmental system under the four years of CSA governance managed to produce over 50 players to the Canadian national team program, several to overseas clubs, and academy signings to the MLS.In the aftermath of the sanctioning issue several prominent established clubs, and the MLS academy clubs departed the league after the confusion caused by the CSA in their immediate de-sanctioning. Significant changes were made at the 2015 annual general meeting of team owners where restrictions on import players were lifted, and a working relationship was formed with the American Soccer League (ASL) in order to assist in areas of competition and business. A television agreement was made with Ethnic Channels Group, and beIN Sports in order to broadcast their television program, and revived their sponsorship deal with Givova in 2016. Affiliations were formed with the Ontario Youth Soccer Association in order to establish a YSA Division to house the CSL Academy teams, and with the Canadian Corporate Soccer League in developing a structure of competition for the city's corporate clubs in Toronto. While reports of alleged match-fixing continued with a report released on October 14, 2015, by the International Centre for Sport Security (ICSS) claiming that 42% of matches in the 2015 season showed signs of suspicious betting activity, resulting in an estimated £4.5 million in potential "fraudulent betting profits". All 12 teams were alleged to had played in a "suspicious" game at least three occasions each.  On February 2, 2016 it was announced that the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) opened investigations in the alleged match fixing in the CSL. As a result, the CSL welcomed the RCMP investigations, and took measures to monitor all matches during the 2016 season.


== Corporate structure ==
The Canadian Soccer League is owned by its member clubs and managed by a board of directors made up of directors from each member club. The board of directors sets out the policy to oversee league operations and selects a chairman. Originally new a franchisee were given the status of a playing member, and were placed on a probation for a period of three years before they were granted shareholder status as a member club with equity ownership. In 2011, the ownership structure of the league was reformed into an incorporated body as the CSL Association Inc in order to bring about a slow process of equalization to the status of teams, while compensating the equity owners who had heavily invested in league throughout the years.The current chairman is Vincent Ursini, who was appointed in March 2011, and the league administrator is Pino Jazbec with Stan Adamson as Director of Media. Previously the chairman also had the function of a commissioner with Michael Di Biase, Cary Kaplan, and Domenic Di Gironimo serving in that capacity.


== Sponsorship ==
The Canadian Soccer League originally had Title sponsorship rights sold to Givova from 2010 to 2012. The Givova deal with the Canadian Soccer League expired at the end of the 2012 season, and was renewed in 2016.
As well as sponsorship for the league itself, the CSL had a number of official partners and suppliers. These partners include companies involved in food and beverage, sports-wear and equipment.


== Teams ==

39 teams have played in the Canadian Soccer League from its inception in 1998, up to and including the 2018 season.


=== First division ===
The following ten clubs contested in the CSL during the 2019 season:


=== Second division ===
The following six clubs contested in the CSL during the 2019 season: 


== Champions ==

This is a list of all Championship finals played so far. The final was called Rogers Cup from 1998 to 2009. Since 2010 it has been called the Givova Cup due to sponsorship change.

KeyNotes on name changes:

York Region Shooters were known as "Italia Shooters" in 2006 when they played in the International Division and originally were known as "Vaughan Shooters" from 2003 until 2005.
Toronto Olympians were later called "Mississauga Olympians" after relocation in 2002.


=== Performance by club ===


== Head coaches ==
Since the inception of the Canadian Soccer League it has contributed in the development and supply of head coaches to the Canadian soccer system. The league as it did in its predecessor league managed to attract many prominent head coaches from abroad to provide the experience needed in the development of coaching. Notable head coaches have included Rudolf Belin, Miroslav Buljan, Manuel Gomes, Rasim Kara, Ivan Markovic, Mladen Pralija, Dragoslav Šekularac, and Ihor Yavorskyi. While at the same time provide the opportunities to produce and develop head coaches as Bijan Azizi, Jason Bent, Jim Brennan, Nikola Budalic, Hubert Busby Jr., Rafael Carbajal, Danny Dichio, Marc Dos Santos, Philippe Eullaffroy, Dejan Gluščević, Carmine Isacco, Goran Miscevic, Darren Tilley, and Duncan Wilde, who have gone on to higher endeavors.The league's longest-serving head coach is Andrei Malychenkov, who has been in charge of FC Ukraine United since the club's entry in 2016. There have been 16 head coaches who have won the CSL Championship. In addition, 12 foreign head coaches have secured the CSL championship, with 4 Canadians winning the title. 


== CPSL/CSL regular season records by clubs ==


=== First division ===


=== Second division ===


== CPSL/CSL playoff records by clubs ==


== Ten best seasons (2001–present: 18 games played or more) ==


== See also ==
Canadian Premier League
North American Soccer League
United Soccer League
USL Premier Development League
Canadian soccer pyramid


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Leagues at soccerway.com
List of Past Champions