Title: Premier Volleyball League
Aspects: {'V-League'}

The Premier Volleyball League (PVL) is a women's professional volleyball league in the Philippines organized by Sports Vision Management Group, Inc. The league began in 2004 as the Shakey's V-League, a women's collegiate league with teams coming from the University Athletic Association of the Philippines (UAAP), the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), the Cebu Schools Athletic Foundation (CESAFI), and other associations.  Since 2011, the league welcomed the participation of corporate clubs and non-collegiate teams.


== History ==

The league was established in 2004 by Sports Vision Management Group, Inc. and sponsor Shakey's Pizza Philippines (International Family Foods, Inc).  Sports Vision was founded by a group led by former PBA commissioner Jun Bernardino and is currently headed by chairman Moying Martelino and president Ricky Palou.
The UST Golden Tigresses won the inaugural V-League championship in 2004 defeating the La Salle Lady Archers. But the De La Salle University have won the next three conferences of the said league defeating their arch-rivals, UST Tigresses in both conferences of Season 2 and SSC - R Lady Stags in Season 3, sweeping them both in the Finals of the three conferences.
The UST Tigresses returned to the League in 2007, after missing Season 3, winning both conferences of Season 4 by defeating the SSC-R Lady Stags in both finals series.
Year 2008 saw the crowning of two other schools aside from UST and DLSU. Adamson University won the championship in the first conference of Season 5 defeating the Ateneo Lady Eagles while San Sebastian College-Recoletos Lady Stags won the second conference of season 5 by sweeping the two comebacking champion teams: DLSU Lady Archers in the semifinals and UST Tigresses in the finals.
However, the Tigresses made history via a "three-peat" winning their fourth, fifth and sixth championships by sweeping both conferences of Season 6 by defeating SSC-R and Adamson, respectively in both championship series, and again winning the first conference of Season 7 by beating SSC-R for the fourth time in the finals.
It was the battle of the runners-up of the last two conferences when Adamson University faced the Lady Stags of SSC-R in the finals of the 2nd Conference Season 7. Adamson won its second V-League crown after defeating San Sebastian 2-1 in their Finals series.
In the 1st Conference Season 8, the Ateneo Lady Eagles won their first Shakey's V-League crown by thumping defending champions Adamson in the Finals. The 2nd Conference of Season 8 was renamed the Shakey's V-League Open Conference as it was opened to non-school teams. Four non-school teams joined the tournament, namely, the Philippine Army, Philippine Navy, Philippine Air Force and Maynilad. The Philippine Army won their first Shakey's V-League championship. Season 8-Open Conference, Shakey's V-League will also aired on GMA Life TV, GMA News TV and GMA Pinoy TV for the international viewers.
Season 9 was locally aired on AKTV on IBC13 and the Hyper channel.
Starting from its 10th Season, Shakey's V-League's new broadcasting partner is now GMA News TV. All of the matches are aired at 1PM to 3PM during weekdays, and 12:45PM to 2:30PM during Saturdays. On May 26, 2013, Shakey's V-League held its first live TV coverage via GMA News TV. It is also announced that the Game 3 matches, both for Championship and the Battle for 3rd will be aired live on GMA News TV on June 2, 2013. In Season 10 Open Conference, Cagayan Valley made history as the Lady Rising Suns scored a 16-0 sweep en route to the team's first V-League title with a 2-0 series win over Smart-Maynilad Net Spikers.
On October 2, 2014, it was reported that a men's division will be included in its 21st conference with four teams.
On May 24, 2016, it was officially announced that Shakey's V-League will now be aired on S+A Channel 23 following an agreement between Sports Vision, Shakey's and ABS-CBN Sports.
In December 2016, it was announced that starting the 14th season in 2017, the Shakey's V-League will be renamed the Philippine V-League (PVL). The season will start with the Reinforced Conference instead of the Open Conference in March 2017. The Spikers' Turf, which was spun-off from the league in 2015, will be merged to the PVL. Shakey's Pizza will remain as a presenter or major sponsor. In March 2017, during the signing of a new partnership deal between Sports Vision and ABS-CBN Sports, it was announced that the name of the league will be Premier Volleyball League (PVL).
Men's divisionIn 2014, a men's division was included in its 21st conference, serving as the precursor of the Spikers' Turf, which was launched the following year. In 2017, after the Shakey's V-League was renamed the Premier Volleyball League (PVL), the men's tournament was brought back to the PVL. The PVL men's division ended with the 2018 PVL Collegiate Conference as its final tournament. The Spikers' Turf was revived on October 6, 2018 with its Open Conference.


== Current teams and coaches ==


== Championship result ==


== Playing venues ==
Games are presently held at the Filoil Flying V Centre (formerly Filoil Flying V Arena). 
During the semi-finals to championship rounds of Season 10, games were held at the Mall of Asia Arena in Pasay and at the iconic PhilSports Arena in Pasig to accommodate larger spectators' attendance. Other venues in the past included the Lyceum of the Philippines University gymnasium, the Blue Eagle Gym and the Rizal Memorial Coliseum.


== Broadcast partners ==
S+A, S+A HD, S+A International (2017–present)
Liga & Liga HD (2018)Current broadcast team (S+A):

Former broadcast team:

Laura Lehmann (now with GMA Network)
Paui Versoza (currently with CNN Philippines)
Ganiel Krishnan (now with ABS-CBN News)
Ira Pablo (now with ESPN5)
Shakey's V-League (2004–2016)


== See also ==
Spikers' Turf
Beach Volleyball Republic
Home and Away League-Philippines
Lipton Invitational Cup
NCAA Volleyball Championship (Philippines)
Philippine Super Liga
UAAP Volleyball Championship
University Athletic Association of the Philippines


== References ==


== External links ==
Premier Volleyball League - Official website
www.v-league.ph
www.vleague.tk
www.pinoysportsnhobby.info