Title: Voacanga africana
Aspects: {'V. africana'}

Voacanga africana is a small tree in the dogbane family, Apocynaceae, that grows to 6 m (20 ft) in height. It is native to tropical Africa. The small tree has leaves that are up to 30 cm (12 in) in length, and the tree produces yellow or white flowers, which after being successfully pollinated bear fruit with a green exocarp and yellow mesocarp surrounding the seeds. The fruit naturally splits in half when it is ripe.


== Description ==
Voacanga africana is a small tree up to 6 m (20 ft) tall with a spreading crown. The leaves are in opposite pairs, dark glossy green above and paler green below. The white flowers are in small bunches and either grow in the leaf axils or at the end of shoots. The fruits usually grow in pairs and are mottled green and spherical, with the seeds sunk in the yellow pulp.


== History ==
Voacanga africana was named by botanist Otto Stapf in 1894 after he received a type specimen from George Scott-Elliot, who had been participating in the Sierra Leone Boundary Commission. From its discovery in 1894 onward, botanists considered the plant to have little economic usefulness apart from as a rubber adulterant. This changed when, in 1955, French chemists Maurice Marie-Janot and Robert Goutarel extracted three alkaloids from the Voacanga africana which they believed could be used in the treatment of heart conditions. Global interest in the plant as a source of useful chemicals followed, and today the plant is a major non-timber forest product exported from Ghana, Cameroon, and Nigeria, and Cote d'Ivoire..


== Uses ==

The plant contains a large number of alkaloids related to the anti-addiction medication ibogaine, including some of the only known naturally occurring CB1 receptor antagonists. One of the plant's alkaloids, Voacangine, has been used as a precursor in the semi-synthesis of ibogaine. While small amounts of ibogaine are found in Voacanga Africana root bark, they do not occur in sufficient quantity to have medicinal or psychoactive effects. However, there are still methods to extract the compound in efficient methods.  Extracts from the plant are also used in the production of vinpocetine, a medication used to treat Alzheimer's disease, and vinblastine, used to treat leukemia.. 
The 1998 Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Plants by Christian Rätsch  included an entry on the Voacanga genus, which claimed that various members of the genus are used in West Africa for their psychoactive effects. Since 2007, more specific, unsubstantiated rumors have circulated that the bark and seeds of the tree are used in Ghana as a poison, stimulant, and ceremonial psychedelic due to an edit made to a Wikipedia article about the plant by a Ghanaian businessman who linked to a website advertising the seeds. A 2009 study by the National Institute of Health Sciences in Tokyo, Japan found that the Voacanga africana seed products sold online consisted of a mix of chemically distinct products.


== References ==


== External links ==
Voacanga africana in West African plants – A Photo Guide.
https://www.covex.com/voacanga-africana/