Title: LG V10
Aspects: {'V10 (disambiguation)'}

The LG V10 is an Android smartphone manufactured by LG Electronics as part of the LG V series. Announced in September 2015 and released in October 2015, the device shares many similarities with the earlier LG G4. Its main feature is a customizable second display above the primary display, which, among other uses, shows notifications and music controls without waking up the primary display. In 2016, its successor, the LG V20 was released.


== Hardware ==
The V10 uses the same camera and many of the same specs as the LG G4. The phone has a 2560x1440 Quantum IPS display, a silicone back with a removable battery and MicroSD Card expansion, a six core Qualcomm Snapdragon 808 processor which sports a big.LITTLE architecture similar to the 810, and 4GB of LPDDR3 933 MHz RAM. The camera is 16 megapixels and includes optical image stabilization with manual DSLR-like modes for video and still shots. There are two front 5 megapixel cameras for widescreen "groupies". The phone supports Qualcomm's Quick Charge 2.0 technology via USB and Qi wireless charging via the optional CPR-120 wireless charging cover.


== Reception ==
CNET gave the LG V10 a 4 out of 5, praising its incorporation of premium features such as a fingerprint reader and wide-angle front-facing camera options, as well as LG's continued inclusion of a removable battery and expandable storage. It was noted that many of its premium features (such as the dual-front cameras and extra message display) felt more like they were "nice to have" rather than must-have features, concluding that "If the V10's goodies aren't essential for you — meaning you don't need a wider view for your selfies or another screen to access your favorite apps and contacts -- it's best to go with something cheaper." Android Authority concluded that the V10 was a more powerful device than the LG G4 due to its additional features and upgrades, stating that "if the G4 fell short of your expectations and you were looking for more, a lot more is what you are getting with the LG V10."The V10 was found to be susceptible to hardware failure nearly identical to that of the G4, as both devices suffered from a manufacturing defect that eventually caused instability, and the devices to enter an unrecoverable reboot loop and thus, inoperable. A class-action lawsuit was filed in March 2017, alleging that LG continued to market and distribute phones with the defect even after LG publicized it.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website