Title: V12 Design
Aspects: {'V12'}

Valerio Cometti+V12 Design is an Italian industrial design firm. It was founded in late 2004 by Valerio Cometti in Milan, Italy. Cometti and V12 Design create products such as TV sets, pieces of furniture, coffee machines, portable computers, eyewear, lamps, mobile phones.
In a short amount of time, bringing together the sensitivity of a designer and the vision of an engineer, Cometti begin collaborating with prestigious brands: from LaCimbali-Faema to Riva1920, from FIAM Italia to FEB31st, from Corradi to Brionvega, from Leucos to Bialetti.


== Curriculum Vitae // Valerio Cometti ==
Valerio Cometti, born in 1975, has a degree in Mechanical Engineering from the Polytechnic of Milan. 
In 2004, after a few years of international experiences, he moves back to Milan and establishes “Valerio Cometti+V12 Design”.
In a surprisingly short amount of time, bringing together the sensitivity of a designer with the vision of an engineer, Cometti starts collaborating with some of the most prestigious brands in the design scene.
In 2006 and 2007, he looks after the re-launch of the historical brand Brionvega.
Soon after he starts an intense collaboration with some of the most prestigious brands in the lighting scene, such as ITre, Luxit, Leucos and many more: distinctive and personal products such as Katana and Bow are born.
In 2008, Valerio Cometti receives a heavy legacy from Castiglioni, Bonetto, Sottsass: designing the most famous coffee machines in the world, LaCimbali and Faema, becomes his responsibility.
In 2010, new prestigious collaborations are born: from furniture design with Riva1920 to outdoor design together with Corradi SpA.
In 2011, in his role of art director of the brand, Valerio Cometti unveils FEB31st in Paris: an innovative venture, that has quickly become one of the fastest growing luxury eyewear brands.
Toward the end of 2011, Mediaset puts Valerio Cometti in charge of the styling and development of its first and ambitious project in the consumer electronics field.
In 2012, Valerio Cometti, together with architect Paolo Balzanelli, unveils MuMaC, the largest museum of the history of coffee machines in the world in Milan: an imposing architecture to celebrate the 100th anniversary of LaCimbali.
In 2012 new collaborations are born, with important brands such as Fiam Italia, Bialetti and San Patrignano.
At the Salone del Mobile 2013, the ambitious “Pace” wooden sculpture celebrates the collaboration between Valerio Cometti and Riva1920. This 3.6 m high, 5 m long, carthorse has been digitally sculpted by Valerio Cometti, then manufactured by Riva1920’s modern CNC machines, carving solid walnut wood. Almost 2 tons of weight and hundreds of hours of milling and finishing, make this sculpture a unique tribute to hard working and talent.
Since 2009, Valerio Cometti is car design columnist for important magazines published by Mondadori Group.


== References ==
Design Directory - Core 77
Style Park - Designer Valerio Cometti
ADI - Design Association


== External links ==
V12 Design
Riva 1920 - Made in Italy
LaCimbali
FDV Group
Brionvega
FEB31st - Eyewear
Valerio Cometti LinkedIn profile