Title: Waaris (2016 TV series)
Aspects: {'Waaris'}

Waaris (English: The Heir) is an Indian Hindi drama-thriller television series, which was broadcast on &TV from May 16, 2016 to December 1, 2017. The title track of the series have been sung by Nooran Sisters. Based on the practice of Bacha posh, the show stars Aarti Singh and Sania Touqueer in lead roles respectively, supported by Anand Suryavanshi, Akshay Dogra, Swati Bajpai in other pivotal roles.


== Plot ==


=== Season 1 ===
Waaris tells about the story of Amba Pawaniya (Aarti Singh), a Punjabi mother who is forced to raise her girl child, Manpreet Pawaniya, as a boy, in efforts to keep peace in the village and prevent her violent brother-in-law Jaggan Pawaniya (Akshay Dogra) from taking leadership.
The show deals with its consequences, and focuses on different situations. It shows the gender discrimination still popular in society, along with every mother's protective nature towards her child.


==== 7 years later ====
Amba has brought her own seven-year-old daughter Manpreet (Sania Touqeer) "Mannu" as a boy, to keep Mannu's father Charan Pawaniya (Mohammed Iqbal Khan)'s title. Amba doesn't want her violent brother-in-law Jaggan to become leader of the village.
Mannu tends to prefer feminine things like her older sisters - Simran aka Simmi (Farhina Parvez) and Gunjan. Once old enough to understand, Mannu decides to become the son her mother needs and suppresses the girl in her. Mannu's oldest sister, Simmi, learns of Mannu's truth and supports her whenever she wants to indulge in her feminine side.
Mannu befriends Raj Bajwa (Wahib Kapadia), a handicapped boy, who is neglected by his father Harjeet (Anand Suryavanshi). Although the Pawanias and Bajwas are known for their rivalry, they work together to try and bring peace to the village. 
Mannu also befriends an older man named Jai (Ashish Kapoor), and even thinks to match make her mother with him but Jai dies in an accident. Then enters Mohini (Jasveer Kaur), Jai's friend from his former life, who loves Jai dearly. Simmi falls in love with Harjeet Bajwa's eldest son, Raman.
Mannu sees this as an opportunity to bring the clashing families together and to form a bond of love between the families. Amba and Harjeet refuse to accept this. Raman and Simmi try to elope but are caught. A confrontation ensues during which Mohini secretly shoots Raman and Harjeet shoots Simmi.
The Bajwas assume that Mannu is responsible for Raman's death. The friendship between Raj and Mannu breaks, and Raj and Raman's mother, Amrit (Vandana Lalwani) takes Raj to the city, leaving her husband Harjeet Bajwa and her other son, Rohan behind.


=== Season 2: 10 years later ===
Manpreet (Farnaz Shetty) has grown up to be Mannu, the Shah of the village. Mannu's sister, Gunjan (Ankita Bahugana), also knows about Mannu'being a girl. Mannu secretly dresses as a girl every once in a while and goes by the name Preet. When Raj (Neel Motwani) returns to the village, he falls in love with Preet, not knowing she is Mannu herself.
Eventually, Raj comes to know the truth. He convinces Preet to reveal her true identity and marry him. When Amba finds out, she tries to kill Raj but Preet dresses up as a bride and takes Raj to a temple to marry her.
As soon as they are married, Raj reveals that it was all a plan to take avenge Raman's death. The village council dethrones her and she is sentenced to live her life outside of the Pawania clan.
With the help of Amrit (Raj's mother), Preet enters the Bajwa house. Sakshi (Roop Durgapal/Vindhya Tiwari), Raj's best friend who also loves him, and Mohini who is now Harjeet's second wife try to break up Raj and Preet's marriage.
Simmi is revealed to be alive but has lost her memory and is mentally unstable. Rohan (Sanket Choukse), Raj's alcoholic brother, finds Simmi when she is running away from where Amba has been hiding her. Due to Mohini, Simmi is exposed, and forced to live with the Bajwas as their dead son Raman's wife. 
Mohini is afraid because Simmi knows that she was the one who killed Raman. Raj makes a deal with Preet - he will help her cure Simmi and she will divorce him as soon as Simmi regains her memory. 
Mohini brings Simmi's former fiancé, Chandar (Angad Hasija), back into their lives to have Simmi remarried. Amba and Preet disapprove knowing Chandar is a fraudster.
Preet decides to get married to Chandar to save Simmi. Seeing Preet close to Chandar, Raj realises that he has fallen in love with her, but she has lost all trust in him. Raj and Rohan find out that Mohini killed Raman. They fail to prove Preet's innocence because of Mohini's plans.
On Preet and Chander's wedding day, Mohini is arrested and Simmi is secretly married off to Rohan. Simmi regains her memory and Preet is saved from the wedding. She is, however, shot when she tries to save Raj from Chander. Chander is arrested but vows revenge. Simmi rejects the marriage with Rohan.
Raj proposes to Preet and confesses his love but she rejects him. Both Raj and Rohan fight for their love for Preet and Simmi respectively. Preet makes Amba the Shah of the Pawanias but the men of the clan disapprove.
Raj supports Preet. To help and save the Pawania women, Raj and Rohan create an elaborate plan and eventually win over their respective ladies as Amba becomes Shah. The epilogue shows Preet teaching her kids, nieces and nephews that there is no difference between men and women.


== Cast ==


=== Main Cast ===
Aarti Singh as Amba Pawania
Farnaz Shetty as Manpreet Pawania (Preet/Mannu)
Neel Motwani as Rajveer Bajwa "Raj"


=== Recurring Cast ===
Anand Suryavanshi as Harjeet Bajwa
Jasveer Kaur as Mohini Bajwa
Akshay Dogra as Jaggan Pawania
Farhina Parvez as Simran Pawania (Simmi)
Kaivalya Chheda as Sukhveer Pawaniya (Sukhi)
Sanket Choukse as Rohan Bajwa
Ankita Bahugana as Gunjan Pawania
Nitin Goswami/Unknown as Gunjan's husband
Swati Bajpai as Ravee Pawania
Vandana Lalwani as Amrit Bajwa
Unknown as Bubbly Pawania
Kushabh Manghani as Nihaal Bajwa
Angad Hasija as Chandar
Mohammed Iqbal Khan as Charan Pawania (Cameo)
Sania Touqueer as young Manpreet Pawania (Mannu)
Wahib Kapadia as young Rajveer Bajwa (Raj)
Unknown as young Rohan Bajwa
Yatin Mehta as Raman Bajwa
Unknown as young Gunjan Pawania
Roop Durgapal/Vindhya Tiwari as Sakshi
Lavina Tandon as Swaroop Bajwa
Mukesh Khanna as Lalaji
Sucheta Shivkumar as Deena Pawania
Rahul Verma Rajput as Raj's friend
Lakshya Wahi as Yuvraaj
Dolly Bindra as Dumroo Daayan
Pankaj Berry as Suraiya
Gaurav Sharma as Veeru
Bhavana Balsavar as Sushila
Sneh Mirani as young Sukhveer Pawania (Sukhi)
Ashish Kapoor as Jai
Eza Sumbul touqeer as gunjan


== Reception ==
Urmimala Banerjee of Bollywood Life has commented "Waaris has the feel of the JP Dutta films of the 80s – earthy, masculine and dramatic. The highlight is obviously the performances. Right from Iqbal to Aarti Singh, they are in fine form. The plot has resemblances to Anup Singh’s Qissa. Here the difference is instead of the father, it’s the mother who makes her daughter live like a son. According to the makers, it is based on the tradition of Bacha Posh, which is quite prevalent in Afghanistan and Pakistan. With supernatural sagas and family dramas ruling TV, Waaris has a newer theme. It remains to be seen how the makers keep up the tempo, which is quite good in the first episode."


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Website on &TV