Title: New Looney Tunes
Aspects: {'Wabbit'}

New Looney Tunes (formerly known as Wabbit: A Looney Tunes Production for its first season) is an American animated television series from Warner Bros. Animation based on the characters from Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies. The series premiered on September 21, 2015 on Cartoon Network, and later premiered on October 5, 2015 on Boomerang. The show (along with most other series produced by W. B. Animation) was then later moved to Boomerang's SVOD service where episodes are released before airing on television.On May 23, 2018, the Boomerang streaming service announced that New Looney Tunes would continue into the 2018–2019 animation season. The third season will be the final season, with production having begun on another Looney Tunes revival called Looney Tunes Cartoons, for which a trailer was shown on June 10, 2019.
On September 3, 2019, reruns of the show began airing on Cartoon Network along with The Tom and Jerry Show.


== Production ==

After The Looney Tunes Show ended production in 2013, concepts for a new show featuring the Looney Tunes led to the decision for a reboot of the characters. At the time, the idea of making a reboot of all of the Looney Tunes focused mainly on Bugs Bunny and in March 2014, it was announced that the reboot would be known as wabbit. (or bugs! in some regions), to coincide with other reboots of Warner Bros. classics, such as Be Cool, Scooby-Doo! and The Tom and Jerry Show. Sam Register, promoted to president of Warner Bros. Animation and Warner Digital Series a month prior, became supervising producer for the series. The animation was done by Yearim and Rough Draft Studios from South Korea and Snipple Animation from the Philippines.
The aim of the reboot was for its cartoons to match the tone of the Looney Tunes shorts in their earlier days. This led to the characters returning to their slapstick comedy roots, but with producers seeking to avoid their clichés, such as the anvil gag. The show's production team placed their emphasis on writing original stories, as well as devising "modern heavy objects to cause pain", according to producer Erik Kuska, with each episode featuring a few shorts in which one or a number of characters became caught up in a situation that they would handle in their own personal way. Despite that, some classic objects can occasionally be seen, such as boulders or safes. Similarly, some classic expressions can be heard, such as Bugs forgetting to "make that left turn at Albuquerque", or uttering "of course you know, this means war" (though "war" is usually replaced with other phrases invoking conflict of some sort). The characters themselves saw some alterations to their appearances, with some also reverting to personality traits they originally had in their earliest appearances - for example, Daffy Duck was reverted to his original screwball personality from his early shorts.
The first season of the show was known as Wabbit and focused primarily on Bugs Bunny as the main character, with recurring appearances by Yosemite Sam, Wile E. Coyote and Porky Pig, and minor appearances by Daffy Duck, Foghorn Leghorn, Elmer Fudd, the Tasmanian Devil (who portrayed a white-collar worker named Theodore Tasmanian), and Michigan J. Frog (who made a cameo at the end of one short). Like his early shorts, Bugs mostly finds himself outwitting opponents either because they seek to cause him trouble or have done something to wreck his peaceful life. The first season saw the introduction of a few new characters to the Looney Tunes franchise, many of them being new villains Bugs faces, but not without the help of his friends.Among the new characters introduced in this show are:

Squeaks the Squirrel - A red squirrel who is Bugs' closest friend and sidekick (whose speech initially consisted only of squeaking sounds, occasionally giving way to intelligible speech in season 3).
Bigfoot - A childlike creature who tends to annoy Bugs, usually calling him "lady" (or occasionally "ma'am"), much to Bugs' chagrin
The Barbarian - An unnamed barbarian that runs afoul of Bugs.
Krakos - The Barbarian's polar bear mount.
Boyd - A lovesick bird.
Cal - A bulky man who considers himself the best at whatever he is doing.
Carl the Grim Rabbit - A Grim Reaper look-alike with rabbit ears.
Claudette Dupri - A fox spy who speaks with an audible French accent.
Dr. Clovenhoof - A sheep scientist.
Eagle Scout - An eagle scoutmaster.
Elliot Sampson - A bobcat scoutmaster and businessman.
Hazmats - As Bugs puts it, they are a group of "highly trained government officials" in hazmat suits that often deal with or chase him, Squeaks, and Bigfoot.
Horace the Horse - A uniformed horse who often works with Porky and speaks in the style of Christopher Walken.
Ivanna - A woman who often encroaches on Bugs' territory and hosts the show "Gettin' Fresh! with Ivanna" on "The Food Notwork",in the episode with the same channel name.
Jack - A "jack of all trades" who does various work. This character was dropped after his first two appearances because his personality traits (including his screaming) were deemed too similar to Yosemite Sam.
King Thes - A royal lion who tries to eat anyone.
Leslie P. Lilylegs - An obnoxious short man who tends to desire power while working for his different bosses.
Miss Cougar - A spinster cougar.
Pampreen and Paul Perdy - Two rich brats who are somehow related to Leslie.
Rhoda Roundhouse - A female wrestler.
Shameless O’Scanty - A not-so-lucky leprechaun.
Sir Littlechin - A knight who often hunts mythical animals.
Slugsworthy the First - A stuck-up elephant seal.
Squint Eatswood - A foul-tempered beaver who hates anyone who's not a beaver.
Tad Tucker - A reality television personality with a strong appetite for rabbits (especially "a family of rabbits").
Trey Hugger - An activist.
Viktor - A narcissistic man who likes to brag about being the best in everything. He appears in "Abracawabbit" as a magician called "Viktor Mageek","Viktor The Science Swede" as a science guy,"Fashion Viktor" as a fashion designer,among more episodes. Along with him in each of his appearances are three young men who appear to idolize him,then later they start to idolize Bugs.
Winter Stag - A cryokinetic deer.According to Kuska, the focus on newer antagonists for Bugs to deal with was described as allowing him to do his "best when he's up against a really good adversary". As a result of the inclusion of new villains, Kuska felt that Elmer Fudd might not be "the man" anymore, having often been a common antagonist that Bugs dealt with in many shorts, despite appearing later on in the series.After the first season ended, the production team decided to focus on the other Looney Tunes stars besides Bugs, thus the show was retooled and renamed New Looney Tunes for the second season and featured a new intro, with music based on the late 1930s Looney Tunes theme. While the first season focused mainly on Bugs and a handful of returning classic characters, the second season saw the addition of stories centering around the other classic characters including, among others, all characters reverted to their original personality starting in Season 2 but the main reverted characters are Daffy Duck, Porky Pig, Yosemite Sam, Elmer Fudd, Tasmanian Devil. Foghorn Leghorn, Sylvester, Tweety, Granny, Speedy Gonzales, Marvin the Martian, Road Runner, Pepé Le Pew (who is usually portrayed as a James Bond-esque secret agent), Witch Hazel, Petunia Pig and Lola Bunny. Some episodes saw characters operating as a double act (a plot mechanic mainly used for Daffy and Porky, as had been done in the classic shorts). Several obscure figures from the classic Looney Tunes shorts such as the Goofy Gophers, Michigan J. Frog, Cecil Turtle, Hubie and Bertie, Count Blood Count, Marc Antony and Pussyfoot, Claude Cat, Pete Puma, Blacque Jacque Shellacque, Sniffles and Gabby Goat also made appearances.
Season 3 will feature Axl Rose as a guest star in the episode "Armageddon Outta Here" and will feature his first studio recording since 2008.


== Cast ==


=== Main cast ===
Jeff Bergman – Bugs Bunny, Elmer Fudd, Sylvester the Cat, Foghorn Leghorn, Michigan J. Frog, Mac, Boyd (season 2)
Dee Bradley Baker – Daffy Duck, Squeaks the Squirrel, Tosh, Frisky Puppy, Carl the Grim Rabbit (1st voice), Krakos the Polar Bear, Shifty the Rat, Officer Enforski
Bob Bergen – Porky Pig, Tweety, Gabby Goat, Clyde Bunny


=== Supporting Cast ===
Eric Bauza – Marvin the Martian, Pepé Le Pew, Hubie, Bertie (season 3), Rock Hardcase, Cal
Jeff Bennett – Hubie, Bertie (season 1), Dr. Clovenhoof, Horace the Horse, The Winter Stag
Matt Craig – Cecil Turtle, Marc Antony, Claude Cat, Count Blood Count, Hazmats, Trey Hugger, Paul Perdy, Pacifico Mule, Minnesota Rats, Curt Martin
Jim Cummings – Taz, Blacque Jacque Shellacque
Paul Julian – Road Runner (archive recordings)
JP Karliak – Wile E. Coyote, King Nutininkommen
John Kassir - Pete Puma, Claude Cat
Maurice LaMarche – Yosemite Sam (season 1)
Matthew Mercer – Bigfoot
Dino Andrade – Speedy Gonzales
Candi Milo – Granny, Ivana, Bear Scout, Weasel Scout
Kath Soucie – Lola Bunny, Sniffles, Claudette Dupri, Pampreen Perdy
Fred Tatasciore – Yosemite Sam (seasons 2 and 3), Carl the Grim Rabbit (2nd voice)


=== Additional voices ===
Carlos Alazraqui – Leslie P. Lilylegs, Shameless O. Scanty, Elliot Sampson Bobcat, Tad Tucker
Steve Blum – Jack, Barbarian
Yvette Nicole Brown – Rhoda Roundhouse
Jessica DiCicco – Petunia Pig
John DiMaggio – Slugsworthy the First
Keith Ferguson – Viktor
Grey Griffin – Vera Vulture
Richard Steven Horvitz – Impkin the Pumpkin King
Mikey Kelley – Boyd (season 1)
Matthew Yang King – Raccoon Scout
Jack McBrayer – Yosemite Jack
Daran Norris – Sir Littlechin, Punkinhead Martin
Kevin Michael Richardson – King Thes, Snorts
Tara Strong - Miss Cougar
Jim Ward – Squint Eatswood
"Weird Al" Yankovic – Weird and Al
Cedric Yarbrough – Eagle Scout


== Episodes ==


== Broadcast ==
Wabbit premiered on September 21, 2015 on Cartoon Network and on Boomerang beginning October 5, 2015, then went on hiatus for over a year and return on April 7, 2017. The series premiered on November 2 on Boomerang in Australia and New Zealand and on Boomerang in the United Kingdom and Ireland. It premiered on November 6, 2015 on Teletoon in Canada and debuted on December 19 on Boomerang in the Middle East and Africa. In India, the series premiered on Pogo TV on 19 December 2015. The series premiered on January 10, 2016 on Cartoon Network Arabic in the Middle East.
New episodes began being broadcast on Boomerang, starting April 7, 2017.
Season 2 premiered on Boomerang UK on September 4, 2017.
The entire first season is available on Netflix in Canada.
The show streams exclusively on the Boomerang premium subscription service, available on Android, iOS, desktop, Apple TV, Amazon Fire TV, Amazon Kindle Fire Tablet, Roku and Chromecast.


== Home media ==
The first half of Season 1 of Wabbit was released onto DVD on April 26, 2016 in the United States. Despite being half of a season, the DVD is subtitled, Hare-Raising Tales. The DVD contains the first 26 episodes (52 segments) but is labeled on the side as Season 1 – Part 1. The DVD contains episodes 23–26 which did not air in the United States until April 7, 2017. Disregarding the show's European name, Wabbit: Season 1 – Part 1 was also released in the United Kingdom on July 25, 2016 and June 15, 2016 in Australia.


== Explanatory notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website at Boomerang (US)
Official website (UK)
Wabbit: A Looney Tunes Production on IMDb
Wabbit  at the Big Cartoon DataBase