Title: WACS-TV
Aspects: {'WACS'}

WACS-TV, virtual channel 25 (VHF digital channel 8), is a Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) member television station serving Americus, Georgia, United States that is licensed to Dawson. Owned by the Georgia Public Telecommunications Commission, the station is operated as part of the statewide Georgia Public Broadcasting (GPB) television network. WACS-TV's transmitter is located north of Parrott, Georgia.
WACS-TV serves primarily the southern part of the Columbus market. The station's signal travels in about a 40-mile (64 km) radius from the transmitter site and also reaches parts of southeastern Alabama.
WACS-TV is one of GPB's most powerful stations, providing at least Grade B coverage from Columbus to Albany. Although Columbus' GPB station of record is WJSP-TV, over-the-air viewers in most of the city get a much stronger signal from WACS-TV. WJSP-TV's transmitter in Warm Springs provides marginal coverage at best to most of Columbus itself, even though it is 45 minutes north of Columbus. By comparison, WACS-TV's transmitter is almost an hour south. WACS-TV also provides a strong signal to much of Albany though that city's GPB station of record is Pelham's WABW-TV (channel 14). All are satellites of Athens/Atlanta's WGTV, the network's flagship station. They simulcast an identical broadcast schedule with no local content.


== Digital programming ==


=== Digital channels ===
The station's digital signal is multiplexed:


== Tower destruction ==

In 2007, the station's broadcast tower was severely damaged by one of several tornadoes that struck the region during a major outbreak on March 1. The same tornado, rated an EF3, went on to cause serious destruction in Americus. Viewers continued to receive GPB directly via cable or satellite, or over the air via neighboring GPB stations WJSP or WABW, while GPB worked to replace the tower and the transmitter building upon which it had fallen. This was finally completed in early May 2008. 
During the 15-month tower repair, the station was at risk of losing its broadcast license due to a one-year statutory requirement for all over-the-air stations enacted by Congress. GPB engineers borrowed the transmitter from W22AC in Hartwell to get WACS back on the air before the end of February 2008.


== References ==


== External links ==
GPB Website of WACS-TV 25
GPB stations map — includes WACS coverage area
WACS TV Lineup and Demographic Data
Query the FCC's TV station database for WACS-TV
BIAfn's Media Web Database -- Information on WACS-TV