Title: KylieX2008
Aspects: {'X Tour'}

KylieX2008 was the tenth concert tour by Australian recording artist Kylie Minogue, in support of her tenth studio album, X (2007). The tour began on 6 May 2008 in Paris, France at the Palais Omnisports de Paris-Bercy and concluded on 22 December 2008 in Melbourne, Australia at the Rod Laver Arena, consisting of 53 shows in Europe, six shows in South America, seven shows in Asia and eight shows in Oceania.
With the announcement of the For You, for Me Tour the following year, Minogue's official website stated that KylieX2008 grossed more than US$70 million from 74 shows in ticket sales in 2008.


== Background ==
After months of speculation it was announced through Kylie's official website that "KylieX2008" would commence in Paris, traveling internationally.
By way of introduction, Minogue stated:
While rehearsing for the tour, Minogue released several behind-the-scenes videos on her website. Concurrently, she released "X" in the United States and filmed two music videos for the third single, "All I See" (including an acoustic rendition).
As the tour began to sell out all over Europe and the UK, many fans speculated that Minogue would bring her tour to Australia and Japan. While promoting her ITV special, The Kylie Show on "Sunrise", she stated: "I just want to have in my head more solidly what the tour will be and if I can manage what I have so far, I would love to come back [to Australia]". It was later revealed that Minogue would bring a limited number of shows to her home country, stating, "The reason I hadn't confirmed dates in Australia is I really didn't know what I was getting into [...] But now I know".


== Concert synopsis ==

As with the X album, the tour rippled the "new wave" theme, made popular in the '80s. The show was divided into seven acts along with an encore. Throughout the course of the tour the show evolved, with numerous changes and revisions.
The concert consisted of a high-tech three-tier stage. On the left and right, mini-stages were made available for the band and backing singers. The main stage was minimalist, with an illuminated video floor and huge moving video curtains as the backdrop. For performances in amphitheaters, open air venues and small arenas the illuminated floor and the lavish props were removed due to technical limitations.
Minogue described the show as being "a show within a show", stating that each act is dramatically different from one another. Minogue stated she was inspired by Queen frontman, Freddie Mercury. "I'm releasing my inner Freddie Mercury. It's hard to explain but parts of the show are so over the top. When I sing 'Your Disco Needs You', it's a real Freddie moment."The first act Xlectro Static act opens the show with a futuristic video showing the outline of Minogue's face polarized in neon colours. The huge video curtains slide open to reveal Minogue perched in a giant hoop dressed in a 'spiderwoman' gown (the dress, however, changes as the tour reaches South America). On technically limited shows, the giant stereo speakers move to reveal Minogue. She performs "Can't Get You Out of My Head", an unreleased track entitled "Ruffle My Feathers" and "In Your Eyes".
The second act Cheer Squad opens with an homage to the Toni Basil hit "Mickey", with Kylie and her dancers appearing as American cheerleaders. Themed as a high-school pep rally, Minogue performs "Heart Beat Rock", "Wow" and "Shocked", the latter being reduced to a dance interlude at some dates.
The third act Beach Party begins with "Loveboat" and continues with a cover of the Barry Manilow hit "Copacabana". On the opening night, "That's Why They Write Love Songs", a tribute to the many romantic show tunes of the 1940s and 1950s, is also performed. Kylie closes the act with "Spinning Around".

For the fourth act Xposed, Minogue is dressed as an 'erotic bellboy'. She appears on a gigantic skull suspended high above the stage performing "Like a Drug". The skull descends to the stage and Kylie goes on to perform "Slow", with excerpts of "Free" (from Intimate and Live), and "2 Hearts". The skull received a very positive reaction from the fans, and was replaced by a CG reproduction at the concerts it could not be featured due to stage limitations (this additional projection was not present before the South American leg).
The Asian-influenced fifth act Naughty Manga Girl sees Minogue emerging on stage in a pyramid which unfurls to reveal Kylie in an outfit inspired by Japanese manga, performing "Come into My World", "Nu-di-ty" and "Sensitized". This segment, which opens with a video of "Sometime Samurai", was completely cut from the technically limited concerts.
The show progresses to its sixth act Starry Nights, with Minogue appearing in a blue satin gown and premiering another new song, "Flower", she then performs a ballad version of "I Believe in You". The act ended with "Cosmic" on the initial dates, but this song was later dropped.
In the seventh act Black Versus White, Minogue appears as a tsar, performing "On a Night Like This", "Your Disco Needs You", "Kids", "Step Back in Time" and "In My Arms". The act begins with a black and white theme and progresses into colour.
Minogue re-emerges on stage in a Cher-esque evening suit to perform an encore. This began with "No More Rain" at all shows except in South America. There, it was removed from the set after the 1 November show for the remainder of that leg. Many songs were added and swapped around during this act including "The One", "Love at First Sight", "I Should Be So Lucky" and the acoustic rendition of "All I See". Starting during the South American leg, "Better the Devil You Know" was performed. For the first two performances in South America only, "Somewhere" was performed, a song from the critically acclaimed musical West Side Story.


== Critical reception ==
The tour received excellent reviews from many critics throughout the UK and Europe. Many called it Minogue's best tour to date. The tour generally sold well throughout Europe and has been seen as a major success. Due to large public demand, several additional dates were slowly added since the tour announcement. Tickets for the original eight shows of the UK leg sold-out in just thirty minutes, and Minogue went on to sell tickets for more than twenty-five shows in England, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. The six shows at the Manchester Evening News Arena made Minogue the all-time most-featured artist at the venue. The UK leg of the tour grossed over 26,000,000 USD (est. 14,000,000GBP), with Minogue performing to just under 300,000 spectators.


== Broadcasts and recordings ==

KylieX2008 premiered on 4 Music in late August 2008. The concert was one of the first broadcast on the new station. It was later shown on Channel 4. In October 2008, it was revealed that FremantleMedia would release a DVD entitled KylieX2008. The disc features the full length concert along with a photo gallery and screen projections. It was released in the United Kingdom and Australia on 1 December 2008. A later release on Blu-ray followed.


== Set list ==
This set list represents the show on the DVD release.


== Tour dates ==


== Notes ==


== Personnel ==
Adapted from the KylieX2008 credits.Performers

Technical


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to KylieX2008 at Wikimedia Commons

Minogue's Official Site