Title: X-Change (visual novel)
Aspects: {'X-Change'}

X-Change is a Japanese eroge developed by Crowd and later published in English by Peach Princess. A remake of the game titled X-Change R was later released. It features new text by Soara Kisai and was never localized, unlike the original.


== Plot ==
One day, while cleaning some shelves in his school's chemistry room, Takuya Aihara spills a chemical on himself and is transformed into a girl. The game has seven different endings; in some Takuya remains a woman, in others he returns to being a man.


== Gameplay ==
Like most visual novels, the majority of the game is spent reading the onscreen text which represents narration and dialogue. The player makes various decisions at certain points in the game. These choices lead to different interactions with the multiple characters throughout the game.


== Characters ==
Takuya Aihara (相原拓也/たくや): The main character. He turns into a female by spilling a mysterious chemical on himself.
Asuka Katakiri (片桐明日香, Katakiri Asuka): A close friend of Takuya. Takuya has secretly been in love with her since childhood.
Asami Satō (佐藤麻美, Satō Asami): The president of the science club, of which she and Takuya are the only members. Though very smart, she is also somewhat unscrupulous in experimenting on Takuya.
Professor Miyagi: The art teacher at Takuya's school. He is extremely kind and gets along well with his students. Miyagi doesn't treat Takuya any differently after he becomes a female.
Keiko Matsunaga (松永啓子, Matsunaga Keiko): The school nurse. Most of the male students are smitten with her, and there have been rumors about her private practices in the nurse's office.
Mr. Terada: The gym teacher, who was hard on the weak Takuya when he was male and is even harder in a different way when he becomes a girl.
Natsumi Aihara (相原夏美, Aihara Natsumi): Takuya's older stepsister. She is controlling and always demands for things to go her way. She often abuses Takuya.
Seiji (清次): Natsumi's boyfriend, who shows an interest in the female Takuya.
Kōji Kudō (工藤弘二, Kudō Kōji): Being very shy, he doesn't have many friends. Strangely, he has fallen for the female Takuya who takes his virginity.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site for the English version
Official site for the Japanese version
X-Change at The Visual Novel Database