Title: List of fictional aircraft
Aspects: {'X19'}

This is a list of fictional aircraft, including fixed wing, rotary wing, and lighter-than-air vehicles. These vehicles are either the subject of a notable work of fiction, or else are important elements of a notable work of fiction. Vehicles in this list are intended to operate in an atmosphere.


== Fictional aircraft ==


=== Military ===
ADF-01 FALKEN — a superfighter armed with an internal laser system from Ace Combat 2 (1997)
ADFX-01/02 Morgan — two experimental fighters capable of carrying a laser system and burst missiles from Ace Combat Zero: The Belkan War (2006)
ADA-01B ADLER — an attacker variant of the ADF-01 FALKEN, designed to defend it from surface-to-air attacks. It is the B model in the ADA-01 line of aircraft, from Ace Combat: Infinity (2014)
ADF-11F Raven — a super-fighter that can optionally use an unmanned drone as the cockpit, from Ace Combat 7: Skies Unknown (2019)
Angel Interceptor —  a carrier based jet fighter from the 1967 TV series Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons. The aircraft operates from an airborne aircraft carrier named Cloudbase. The craft is based on the World Air Force Viper, powered by twin turbo-jet compressors feeding a single ramjet. It is armed with a nose cannon, and rockets.
ASF-X Shinden II — an experimental fighter designed by Macross creator Shōji Kawamori for Ace Combat: Assault Horizon (2011)
AT-99 Scorpion — a VTOL gunship which uses twin ducted-rotors for lift, it has a crew of one. The aircraft appeared in the 2009 film Avatar.
AV-14 Attack VTOL — a UNSC airborne attack vehicle, also known as the Hornet, from the Halo video game series
Aurora - an American supersonic bomber from Command & Conquer: Generals
A/V-32 Pegasus — a fictional jumpjet operated by the US Marine Corps in the Jim DeFelice novel Havana Strike.
B-3 — a fictional derivative of the B-2 Stealth Bomber featured in the 1996 film Broken Arrow
B-39 Peacemaker — a fictional USAF Cold War nuclear-powered bomber in the Charles Stross novelette A Colder War
BV-38 Flying Wing — a twin prop, bent winged transport, which appeared in the 1981 film  Raiders of the Lost Ark
C-21 Dragon — a VTOL four-post ducted-fan transport, and gunship which appeared in the film Avatar
C709 Longsword-class Interceptor — a UNSC main fighter-bomber in the Halo game series
CFA-44 Nosferatu — an advanced fighter plane with all-directional missiles and railguns from Ace Combat 6: Fires of Liberation (2007)
Dropship 79 — also known as the Pelican, an extremely versatile craft used by the UNSC, mainly for the transportation, insertion and pickup of personnel, vehicles and equipment. Occasionally used as a support gunship in the Halo video game franchise
EB-52 Megafortress — The Megafortress first appears in Dale Brown's novel Flight of the Old Dog and is expanded and upgraded in his later books. It has all the latest weapon systems, bombs, and missile. The design contains a long SST nose, with a stealth shape, and twin V-tails. The eight engines are replaced by four larger turbofans further down the line.
EB-1C Vampire — first appearing in Dale Brown's novel Battle Born, the EB-1C is an advanced variant of the B-1 bomber.  It differs from the real B-1 in that its wings are always swept all the way back, the tail is smaller and lacks the horizontal stabilizer, and it utilizes "Mission Adaptive Skin" that works by micro-hydraulics to affect the shape of the its wings in-flight.
F-19 Ghostrider — based on the Have Blue project of the 1970s. Testors model maker released a conceptual model airplane in 1986, and Monogram followed with its own version in 1987. Earning massive media attention, the design became the shape of the mysterious "Stealth Fighter" in the public eye until the F-117 Nighthawk was unveiled in 1990.  As it turned out, the sleek and low-profile design looked nothing like the highly angular, faceted F-117 it was meant to portray.
F-41 — a UNSC exoatmospheric multirole strike fighter, also known as the Broadsword. It is also capable of operating within the atmosphere. This craft comes from the Halo video game series.
F-22V Velociraptor — a delta-winged version of the F-22 Raptor featured in the Jim DeFelice novel Cyclops One.
F-117X Remora — an experimental F-117 variant used in the film Executive Decision. It is modified to transport personnel with an in-flight docking probe designed to dock with other aircraft in midair. Originally designed to relieve fatigued bombers crews at altitude, this aircraft was used to transport a special operations unit to board a commercial airline which had been highjacked by terrorists.
F/A-37 Talon — a single-seat fighter attack aircraft of the U.S. Navy, which appeared in the 2005 film Stealth. It is capable of Mach 3.5, super cruise and has a range of 4,000 miles. It is also accompanied by an AI-operated UAV which assists in targeting and ISR for the Talon.
Firehawk — a VTOL multi-role fighter jet that appears in Command & Conquer 3. The craft is a seats two, forward-swept wings design with rear-swept winglets and canards. It can be refitted with special boosters that enable them to go sub-orbital, becoming impervious to anti-aircraft fire.
Gilbert XF-120 — a fictitious X-jet portrayed by an XB-51 in camouflage from the 1956 film Toward the Unknown
Mammoth Avenger — a Tiltrotor VTOL aircraft in the game Grand Theft Auto V, manufactured by the fictional company Mammoth. Closely inspired by the V-22 Osprey.
Manta Fighter — a single-place 1939 twin-prop design, with a delta tail & straight wings near the aft, from the 2004 film Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow
Mikoyan MiG-28D Finback – a Soviet jet fighter which appears in Adam Hall's 1978 Quiller spy novel The Sinkiang Executive
MiG-28 — a fictional aircraft flown by the antagonist in the 1986 film Top Gun. The real aircraft used to portray the MiG-28 was a Northrop F-5.
MiG-31 Firefox — a fictional aircraft that appeared in Craig Thomas' novels Firefox and Firefox Down, as well as the 1982 film by the same name starring Clint Eastwood. The aircraft was portrayed as a Soviet interceptor with stealth capabilities, and had a thought-controlled weapons system. Its designation is shared with the real MiG-31 Foxhound.
MiG-37 Ferret — a fictional Soviet stealth model aircraft produced by the Testors Model Company, and was a counter to the American F-19. The craft combined a faceted airframe design with cooled exhausts, and radar-absorbing skin. Purely conjectural, the design nonetheless turned out to be closer in shape to the actual F-117 Nighthawk.
MiG-242 - a fictional Soviet aircraft regarded as "the most powerful fighter-bomber in the world", appearing in the 1968 pilot episode of Joe 90, a British Supermarionation television series co-created by Gerry and Sylvia Anderson
SA-2 Samson — a ducted-fan twin-rotor utility assault transport from the film Avatar
SA-43 Hammerhead - Endo/Exo-Atmospheric Attack Jet from TV series Space: Above and Beyond. U.S. Marine Corps' primary space and atmospheric attack fighter. The craft could launch directly from ground bases or from large space-bourne carriers.
Savoia S.21 — a fictional fighter seaplane that appears in the anime film Porco Rosso, directed by Hayao Miyazaki. Its name is shared with the real-life Savoia S.21; however, the two do not look similar.
Stingray Deluxe — a pre-war nuclear powered aircraft in Fallout 4. One downed craft is just south of the in game "Nordhagen Beach" and another one just outside the exit of Arc-Jet Systems. Was planned to be a private jet but eventually was integrated into the military. A lot were downed during the war of 2077.
Su-38 Slamhound — a Russian Spetsnaz Guard Brigade support fighter in EndWar
SuperCOIL — a new, secretly developed radar-invisible B-2 bomber, code-named SuperCOIL, carries the ultimate weapon: an airborne, chemically fueled "COIL" laser powerful enough to shoot down scores of missiles in mid-flight, thus revolutionizing air combat, in thriller novel “SuperCOIL” by Robert Ari. Click on the foot note for more.
Tiltrotor craft — a stealth VTOL vehicle used by the Antagonist's in the sci-fi film Resident Evil: Afterlife. The craft has similarities to the real life V-22 Osprey.
UD4L Cheyenne — a dropship from the 1986 film Aliens. The craft was attached to the  U.S.S. Sulaco and was used to ferry troops and equipment down to colonized planet of LV-426.
UH-144 Falcon — a troop transport used by the UNSC defense force in the Halo franchise
VB-02 Vertibird — a VTOL tiltrotor aircraft in the Fallout game series. At least two variants exist: a larger transport version that appears in Fallout 2 and a smaller, more compact gunship version armed with a rapid-firing laser weapon, unguided air-to-ground rockets and even small-yield tactical nuclear weapons, appearing in Fallout 3. The gunship variant is implied to be nuclear-powered yet still has enough internal space to carry a squad of soldiers in powered armor. Originally scheduled to be fielded in 2085, a nuclear war in 2077 stopped the project in the prototype stage until the Enclave finished and mass-produced the craft somewhere before 2241.
VF-0 Phoenix — from the Macross Zero anime sci-fi series
Vertigo - a next-generation heavy bomber aircraft of the Brotherhood of Nod that appears in Command & Conquer 3: Tiberium Wars. It utilizes the Lightbender stealth generator to render itself invisible to the unaided eye.
Vic Viper — the protagonist jet fighter in the video game Gradius. It is a high-performance jet fighter, capable of variable attacks.
Villiers Vindicator — a fictional V bomber of the British Royal Air Force in Ian Fleming's novel Thunderball. In the film adaptation, it was replaced by an Avro Vulcan, one of the real V bombers.
Willis JA-3 — a rocket/jet 1400 mph X-plane from the 1950 film Chain Lightning, with Humphrey Bogart
X-02 Wyvern — an advanced swing-wing fighter from Ace Combat 04: Shattered Skies (2001), and a two-seat X-02S Strike Wyvern variant appearing in Ace Combat 7: Skies Unknown (2019)
X-49 Night Raven — a superplane equipped with a laser cannon and controlled by nerve connections to a pilot's brain from Ace Combat 3: Electrosphere (1999)
XA-20 Razorback — a main support fighter in the United States Joint Strike Force in EndWar. Also appears in H.A.W.X as a reward for completing the game, revealing it to have stealth capabilities.
XFA-27 — an experimental aircraft designed to fire four missiles at once from Ace Combat 2 (1997)
XFA-33 Fenrir — a superfighter equipped with VTOL technology, a cloaking device, and a microwave radiation weapon also from Ace Combat X: Skies of Deception (2007)
XP-14F Skystriker — the primary air-superiority fighter used by G.I. Joe in the comics and animated series in the early 1980s, sold as a toy from 1983-86. It closely resembles the real-life U.S. Navy F-14 Tomcat.
Yak-12 — a fictional Soviet jet aircraft featured in the film Jet Pilot starring John Wayne.  A Lockheed T-33 was used to portray fictitious plane.  The designation does exist in the form of the Yakovlev Yak-12 a utility airplane from the Soviet Union.


=== Special operations ===
Aerowing — an aircraft built by Lex Luthor with two fuselages, six engines and undernose guns and flown in 1928 (sic) from mid-Atlantic to the Amazon rainforest in the DC Comics book Elseworld's Finest #2
Airwolf — an attack helicopter from the 1984 TV series by the same name. It was capable of supersonic flight, and carried retractable weapons. The helicopter used was a modified Bell 222.
Albatross — appears in Gerry Anderson’s TV series New Captain Scarlet
AmphibiCopter — a 21st century submersible two-seater aircraft which appeared in the 2001 film AI: Artificial Intelligence
Batcopter — a modified Bell 47G-3 which made an appearance in the 1966 film Batman
Batwing — This iconic aircraft was used in the 1989 film Batman starring Michael Keaton
Blue Thunder — a fictional police helicopter from the film and television series of the same name. The aircraft incorporated an optically tracked gatling gun, a whisper mode for quiet flight, surveillance equipment and an infrared camera. The helicopter used in the film was a modified Aérospatiale Gazelle.
Bubble ship — an aircraft that resembled a dragon fly combined with the canopy of a Bell 47 helicopter. The machine features rotating VTOL engines and a cockpit that swivels along with the upper and lower guns fixed to it. The craft was flown by Tom Cruise’s character “Jack Harper”, in the sci-fi film Oblivion.
Cobra F.A.N.G. — a short range one man light-attack gyrocopter, equipped with air-to-air heat-seeking rockets. This craft appeared in the comics and the first season of the G.I. Joe animated series, as well in the 1985  computer game.
Condor (Variants Referred to as Vulture) — A main element of the first chapter of Wolfenstein: The New Order and appearing in Wolfenstein: The Old Blood, the Condor is the supposed result of the modification of an Avro Lancaster using American built parts. It is equipped with four quad autocannon turrets, with one mounted above the protruding cockpit, two mounted at the top and bottom of the tail end, and one turret chin-mounted below the cockpit. The autocannons appear to fire HVAP rounds exclusively, as enemy aircraft can take multiple hits without catching fire, while armored ground units are affected much more by these rounds. Although the official name for this type of aircraft is "Condor", the call sign for troop transport variants is Vulture, while "Condor" call signs only being used to refer to the troop support variants.
Flying Sub FS-1 — Introduced in the Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea TV series, this hybrid submersible is capable of flight, as well as conducting underwater operations. The design resembles that of a Stingray fish, with twin tail fins on the back, and has room for a crew of two.
Ornithopter — a flapping-wing craft featured in the novel Dune by Frank Herbert and in the 1984 film by the same name
Snowspeeder — a military variant of the T-47 airspeeder, adapted for the cold climates. The craft appeared in the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back.
Invisible plane — from the Wonder Woman comic books and TV series
Quinjet — a craft featured in the Avengers comic books and films. It is a multi-role jet aircraft used by S.H.I.E.L.D, with VTOL capabilities and has a titled cockpit to provide the pilots with better visibility during landings
Spider's Wing — a flying wing aircraft used by the leader of the Spider Gang to terrorize the citizens in the Dick Tracy comics
Thunderbird 2 — from Gerry Anderson's Thunderbirds this vehicles was bulbous VTOL cargo carrier that came equipped with a variety of service modules.
TurboKat — from Swat Kats The Radical Squadron. It is a multi-role jet used by the Swat Kats, with VTOL capabilities and with various missile, avionics, etc.
X-Jet Blackbird — featured in the X-Men films, this was a modified SR-71 with forward swept wings, and VTOL capable. The craft was roomy enough to carry a dozen personnel.
YF-12A X-Jet Prototype — the predecessor to the X-Jet and the SR-71 Blackbird, the aircraft was designed and flown by Hank McCoy aka Beast. The prototype incorporates VTOL capabilities and an internal cargo hold for personnel. The plane appeared in the 2011 film  X-Men: First Class.


=== Commercial ===
Antonov 500 — a heavy transport that appeared in the film 2012, based on the Antonov An-225
Bertie — the mascot of Aeroplane Jelly
Carreidas 160 — a prototype 10-seat, supersonic business jet seen in Flight 714 to Sydney, one of The Adventures of Tintin
Elgin E-474 — featured in the 2005 film Flightplan, based on the Airbus A380
Fireflash — a hypersonic transport featured in Gerry Anderson's Thunderbirds TV series
Fortress-1 and Fortress-2 — successive pair of helicarrier-like, massive vehicles employed by the fictional Cyberbiotics Corporation in the Disney animated series Gargoyles, commissioned by the firm's founder, the disabled CEO Halcyon Renard
Hindenburg III — an upgraded dirigible featured in the film Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow
Norton N-22 — a wide-body passenger aircraft at the center of a safety investigation in Michael Crichton's novel Airframe
Orion III — a space plane featured in the 1968 sci-fi film 2001: A Space Odyssey, the craft was used to shuttle personal from earth to the orbiting space station, and wore the Pan Am livery
Rutland Reindeer — appeared in No Highway in the Sky, a film based loosely on Neville Shute's No Highway. The aircraft used was a modified Handley Page Halifax.
Skyfleet S570 — a prototype airplane that appeared in the 2006 film Casino Royale, which was actually a Boeing 747-200 originally owned by British Airways. It was refitted with two mock-up engines on each inner pylon and external fuel tanks on the outer pylons, somewhat anachronistically resembling a B-52 Stratofortress.
Spectrum Passenger Jet — a twin turbojet personnel transport, from Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons
Starflight — a hypersonic transport which was featured in the 1983 TV movie Starflight: The Plane That Couldn't Land
Straton 797 — a supersonic airliner which appeared in the novel Mayday and the filmed adaption
Rocket plane — a Concorde-like rocket plane used by the Nazi Empire in The Man in the High Castle novel and TV series
Luxemburg (LZ131) — a dirigible based on a Zeppelin design, which appeared in the climatic ending of the 1991 film The Rocketeer


=== Civilian ===
Albatross — a 19th century large propellered airship in the novel Robur the Conqueror aka Clipper of the Clouds by Jules Verne, and in the film version of Verne's The Master of the World
Conwing L-16 — a fictitious, amphibious seaplane model based on the Fairchild C-119 Flying Boxcar featured in the animated Disney series TaleSpin, an example of which is the Sea Duck flown by bush pilot Baloo
Drake Bullet — an air racer flown by Clark Gable’s character in the 1938 film Test Pilot. A Seversky P-35 was used to fulfill that role.
Harold the Helicopter — a cartoon helicopter based on the Sikorsky H-19 featured in the Thomas & Friends TV series
Jenny Haniver — a red airship that is the prominent airship of Philip Reeve's Mortal Engines Quartet.
T-16 Skyhopper — Luke Skywalker's canyon flyer on the planet Tatooine which appeared in  Star Wars: A New Hope
The Terror — a 19th century land, sea and air craft invented by Robur the Conqueror featured in Verne's novel The Master of the World


=== Unmanned ===
EDI — featured in the film Stealth, the EDI (Extreme Deep Invader) UCAV (Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicle) was developed as an assistant to the FA-37 Talon.  The craft has an artificial intelligence system that allows it to operate without a human pilot. The sensors can identify a human target by fingerprints, voice print or facial recognition. It has V/STOL capabilities and pulse-detonation engines which feature twin hybrid scramjet turbos fueled by catalyzed A1 methane.
ADF-11F Raven — featured in Ace Combat 7: Skies Unknown, the ADF-11F's cockpit can detach and expand to fly on its own as the ADF-11, which was developed from the ADFX-10.
XR-900 Geopelia — featured in Ace Combat 3: Electrosphere, the UCAV was designed by defectors from General Resources to Neucom/Neuwork. The XR-900 uses a Tactical Laser System, much like the plane it was inspired by, the X-49 Night Raven, albeit for both planes, it is semi-automatic, rather than continuous like the Morgan, Falken, and Raven.


== Airborne aircraft carriers ==
Argo — flying wing operated by Monarch that deploys and recovers V-22 Ospreys in Godzilla: King of the Monsters
Arsenal Bird — Ace Combat 7: Skies Unknown
Cloudbase — Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons
Hagoromo — airship capable of carrying Ki-43 and N1K1-J for defense against air pirates and goods transportation from the anime The Magnificent Kotobuki
Helicarrier — Nick Fury/S.H.I.E.L.D./The Avengers/The Avengers: Age of Ultron/Captain America: The Winter Soldier
Iron Vulture — airship captained by the air pirate leader Don Karnage in the Disney animated series TaleSpin
P-1112 Aigaion — Ace Combat 6: Fires of Liberation
Pandora — airship used by Nathan Zachary and his air pirate gang the Fortune Hunters in the Crimson Skies game franchise
Protoss Carrier — StarCraft universe
Royal Navy flying aircraft carriers — Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow
Silvana (some translations: Sylvana) — military airship from the anime Last Exile
Skybase — Gerry Anderson's New Captain Scarlet
XB-0 Hresvelgr — Ace Combat Zero: The Belkan War
Valiant — Doctor Who


== See also ==
List of fictional spacecraft
Aircraft in fiction
Airborne aircraft carrier


== References ==