Title: The Fairly OddParents
Aspects: {'Xana (disambiguation)'}

The Fairly OddParents is an American animated television series created by Butch Hartman for Nickelodeon. The series follows the everyday misadventures of Timmy Turner, a 10-year-old boy with two fairy godparents named Cosmo and Wanda. He is constantly at odds with his 16-year-old babysitter Vicky, with whom his parents are oblivious to her malevolent doings against their son. It was produced by Frederator Studios (2001–2017), Nickelodeon Animation Studio and Billionfold Inc. (2008–2017).
The series originated from shorts on Nick's animation showcase, Oh Yeah! Cartoons, that aired from 1998 to 2001. It was later picked up as a half-hour series on March 30, 2001, due to its popularity. Originally, it ended on November 25, 2006, totaling five seasons, but resumed production in 2008. Production of the series ceased again after Hartman left Nickelodeon in February 2018.


== Premise ==
Set in the fictional town of Dimmsdale, California, The Fairly OddParents tells the story of a 10-year-old boy named Timmy Turner who is neglected by his parents and tortured by his babysitter, Vicky. One day, he is granted two fairy godparents, Cosmo and Wanda, who grant his every wish to improve his miserable life. However, these wishes usually backfire or cause a series of problems that Timmy must fix. Earlier episodes of the series tend to revolve around Timmy trying to navigate his everyday life at home, at school or elsewhere in town with his best friends, Chester and A.J. or occasionally his parents, while also trying to fix a wish gone awry and ultimately, learning a lesson in the end. Later in the series, Timmy wishes that Cosmo and Wanda would have a baby, whom they named Poof. Much later in the series, Timmy gets a pet fairy dog named Sparky. Even later in the series, Timmy is informed that due to a shortage of available fairies, he must now share Cosmo and Wanda with his new neighbor, Chloe Carmichael, who is essentially his polar opposite. Chloe loves sharing, animals, and everything that is ecologically friendly.
At the beginning of the series, Vicky was the main antagonist, but as the series progressed, many more villains were introduced, including: Denzel Crocker, Timmy's mentally-ill teacher who wishes to prove the world that fairies exist; The school bully, Francis; Remy Buxaplenty, a young billionaire child with a fairy godparent who is set on getting rid of Timmy's fairy godparents due to his immense jealousy towards him for having two fairy godparents compared to his one; Dark Laser, a parody of Darth Vader, who wants to destroy Timmy and the Earth; The Pixies, who are known to wield as much power as fairies, but they treat their magical powers like a business. The Pixie's primary goal is to take control of Fairy World and the Earth; The Anti-fairies, who are similar to the actual fairies, but with polar opposite personalities and character traits. Anti-fairies are also known for causing bad luck; Norm the Genie, who hatches plans to gain freedom from his lamp and get revenge on Timmy. And Timmy's teacher, Mr. Crocker, who is obsessed with proving the existence of fairies and capturing a fairy godparent to use for his own personal gains. Crocker is especially dangerous to Timmy because, according to Da Rules, a large rulebook that defines what children can and cannot wish for and how fairy godparents must behave, no one else can know about fairy godparents except for the children who have them and they will be taken away forever and the child's memory of them will be erased should anyone else find out about them.


== Setting ==
The Fairly OddParents is set in the fictional city of Dimmsdale, California. Dimmsdale has a sign on some mountains near the city that is a parody of the Hollywood Sign. In the episode, "Vicky Loses Her Icky", the Mayor of Dimmsdale unveils the "Welcome to Dimmsdale - Nicest Town on Earth!" sign. However, at the end of the episode, the President of the United States changes the word “Nicest” to “Meanest”. Dimmsdale appears to be average-sized, with a downtown containing large buildings, skyscrapers and a city hall, but also containing uptown areas with suburban residences (including the neighborhood where Timmy, his parents and his friends live) and businesses, such as Timmy's school; a hospital; a jail; a sports complex called, “The Dimmadome”, which is named after its founder and owner; a local TV channel and various restaurants and stores, as well as a park in the center of the city. Dimmsdale also appears to have rural farmland located outside of the city. The adults who live in Dimmsdale are notably moronic and often settle situations with things like angry mobs, but they do still manage to form a working and functioning society. In the episode, "Which Witch is Which?", it was revealed that Dimmsdale was founded in the 1630s and named after a man called Dale Dimm.
When the show needs to, it switches its location to Fairy World, the home of the fairies, which is a floating world located on top of some clouds and colored with an abundance of pink and purple. Fairy World is depicted as a large metropolis with houses, streets, different kinds of buildings and skyscrapers. Most buildings in Fairy World have crowns or stars above their roofs. The fairies have a civilization like that of humans, but with their primary source of power being magic, which also keeps their world afloat. A large rainbow acts as the bridge between Fairy World and the Earth, although the bridge seems to exist only for decoration since fairies teleport via magic to and from Earth. Fairy World is not actually a part of Earth but is depicted as a separate world in outer space located near Earth's orbit that can only be accessed by magic. Among the most notable landmarks in Fairy World is the glowing entrance sign on the other side of the rainbow bridge and the giant wand located in the center of Fairy World that powers the fairies' magic. Jorgen Von Strangle, who acts as the leader of the fairies and Fairy World is an enormous and tough fairy with an Austrian accent, similar to that of Arnold Schwarzenegger. Jorgen personally dislikes Timmy at the beginning of the series but warms up to him over time.
Another location seen in the show is the city of Chincinatti, the home town of Timmy's favorite comic book superhero, the Crimson Chin. Other locations include the dark and twisted Anti-Fairy World, the dark counterpart of Fairy World where the Anti-fairies reside; the dull and gray metropolis of Pixies Inc., home of the Pixies; and Yugopotamia, another planet where Timmy's alien friend, Mark Chang, lived until the episode “New Squid in Town!” when Timmy invites Mark to live in the Dimmsdale junkyard in order to escape his evil fiancée, Princess Mandie.


== Voice cast ==

Tara Strong as Timmy Turner, Poof
Daran Norris as Cosmo, Mr. Turner
Susanne Blakeslee as Wanda, Mrs. Turner
Grey DeLisle as Vicky
Carlos Alazraqui as Denzel Crocker
Matthew W. Taylor as Sparky
Kari Wahlgren as Chloe CarmichaelThroughout its run, celebrities who have guest starred on The Fairly OddParents include: Adam West, Jay Leno, Norm Macdonald, Mary Hart, Chris Kirkpatrick, Alec Baldwin, Ben Stein, Jackie Mason, Jason Bateman, Rick Fox, Gilbert Gottfried, Michael Clarke Duncan, Brendan Fraser, Patrick Warburton, Gene Simmons, Paul Stanley, Tom Arnold, and Scott Hamilton.


== Production history ==


=== Origins (1998–2001) ===

Prior to the creation of The Fairly OddParents, Butch Hartman was working at Cartoon Network on Johnny Bravo. In 1997, Fred Seibert contacted Hartman about pitching ideas for his Oh Yeah! Cartoons series which he was developing for Nickelodeon, Hartman initially declined the offer. Several months later, Johnny Bravo finished and Hartman decided to create his own series instead of going back to working for other studios.

Hartman started developing his own series by drawing a picture of a little boy who would become Timmy Turner. Hartman was originally going to name him Mike, after his brother Mike Hartman, but they had a fight that day, so Hartman named him after his other brother Timmy Hartman instead. Hartman wanted Timmy to be able to go anywhere because he never wanted to be stuck for a story transition. Hartman was originally going to give Timmy science powers, but decided against it due to Dexter's Laboratory having recently come out. Instead, he decided to give Timmy a magic friend. He drew Wanda first and then decided that she needs someone to talk to other than Timmy, and that was when he drew Cosmo. After coming up with the entire premise for The Fairy OddParents in about fifteen minutes, Hartman first pitched the idea to Hanna-Barbera and then to Cartoon Network, both of whom turned it down. Hartman then went back to Seibert at Nickelodeon and successfully pitched it to them for Oh Yeah! Cartoons.While in early development, the series was titled The Fairy GodParents and then it was briefly changed to Oh My GodParents. Bill Burnett came up with the title The Fairly OddParents, which they ended up sticking with. Hartman originally created The Fairly OddParents as a seven-minute short film, which was one of the thirty-nine short cartoons created for Oh Yeah! Cartoons. Hartman made ten more seven-minute short films of The Fairly OddParents in total for Oh Yeah! Cartoons, which aired on Nickeodeon from September 4, 1998 to March 23, 2001. Due to the success of the shorts, Nickelodeon decided to pick up The Fairly OddParents for a full-length series alongside fellow Oh Yeah! Cartoons: ChalkZone and My Life as a Teenage Robot. Nickelodeon ordered seven twenty-three-minute episodes for the series' first season, which premiered on March 30, 2001 in the half-hour before fellow Nicktoon Invader Zim made its debut.Unlike the later series, the animation in the original shorts is not as smooth and the designs are notably different (including Timmy's parents, Mr. and Mrs. Turner, who are only seen from the neck down with their faces hidden in the pilot episodes and appear to be more intelligent than they appeared to be in the proceeding series, yet still easily duped by Vicky's abhorrent actions). Other notable differences include the voices like Timmy Turner, who was voiced by Mary Kay Bergman rather than Tara Strong. Cosmo is significantly more intelligent than he appears to be in the proceeding series while Wanda is shown to be less both intelligent and of a nag. Vicky is also much less evil than in the current series; she also calls Timmy by his name as opposed to the more often used "twerp".
Initially, Hartman wanted Timmy to wear a blue hat, but he changed it to pink after his blue marker ran out of ink. Additionally, Wanda was originally going to have blue hair, but it was also changed to pink so that it wouldn't clash with Timmy's bedroom walls. Wanda was originally going to be named "Venus", but her name was changed to Wanda after her magic wand while Cosmo was named after Cosmo Ancelotti, an animator from Hanna-Barbera and Hartman's former coworker.


=== Original run (2001–2006) ===
Upon its premiere, The Fairly OddParents was immediately popular and quickly became the second-highest-rated children's program among kids ages 2–11 on both network and cable television, behind Nick's own SpongeBob SquarePants. The series managed to briefly steal SpongeBob's spot as the number one highest rated children's television program in mid-2003. The Fairly OddParents also attracted a wide audience, appealing to kids as well as to teenagers and adults.On January 24, 2006, Hartman announced on his forum that Nickelodeon had ceased production of the show. "The Jimmy Timmy Power Hour 3: The Jerkinators" is the fifth-season finale in production order and was intended to be the series finale, airing on July 21, 2006. However, Nickelodeon broadcast the episode "Timmy the Barbarian/No Substitute for Crazy" after "The Jerkinators" as the fifth-season finale in airing order, on November 25 of that year.


=== Revival (2007–2011) ===
On February 2, 2007, Hartman announced on his forum that Nick granted The Fairly OddParents twenty more episode slots, making sure the show resumed production. Later on July 7, 2007, a special titled 77 Secrets of the Fairly OddParents Revealed hinted that a new character would join the series.

After a one-year hiatus, Nickelodeon announced that they would begin the sixth season, which would consist of twelve episodes alongside the broadcast of a television film called Fairly OddBaby, which introduced a new character, a baby fairy named Poof, to the main cast of characters. A huge hit, Fairly OddBaby aired on February 18, 2008, and garnered 8.89 million viewers for its premiere; the rebroadcast of the film the following day garnered 4.82 million viewers, making it the number one and ninth most viewed cable broadcast respectively for the week of February 18–24, 2008.


=== Live-action films and end of the series (2011–2017) ===

To honor the tenth anniversary of The Fairly OddParents, a live-action television film titled, A Fairly Odd Movie: Grow Up, Timmy Turner!, premiered on July 9, 2011. The film is set 13 years after the animated series and stars Drake Bell as a 23-year-old Timmy Turner, who is trying his hardest not to grow up in order to prevent losing his fairy godparents, and Daniella Monet as Tootie, who has grown into a mature and beautiful activist with whom Timmy falls in love. The premiere of the movie attracted 5.8 million viewers and it was the top-rated television broadcast on cable networks for the week of July 10–16, 2011, and ranked as "2011's Top Original TV Movie on Basic Cable with Kids and Total Viewers".The success of A Fairly Odd Movie: Grow Up, Timmy Turner! spawned two sequels: A Fairly Odd Christmas and A Fairly Odd Summer, which premiered on November 29, 2012, and August 2, 2014 respectively. Drake Bell and Daniella Monet reprised their respective roles in both of the sequels.The ninth season of The Fairly OddParents began with a television special titled "Fairly OddPet", which premiered on March 23, 2013 and attracted 3.8 million viewers. The ninth season's official run began on May 4, 2013. Season nine introduced a new character, Timmy's pet fairy dog Sparky, to the show's main cast. Season nine contained twenty-six episodes, making it the longest season in the series. It is also the first season to be formatted in both high definition and widescreen.

The tenth season of The Fairly OddParents began with a special called The Big Fairy Share Scare!, which introduced another new main character named Chloe Carmichael, Timmy's new neighbor who he is forced to share Cosmo and Wanda with due to a fairy shortage. The tenth season aired from January 15, 2016, to July 26, 2017, on both Nickelodeon and Nicktoons. The visuals and lyrics for the theme song were changed for season ten in order to include Chloe; however, it still contained the same rhythm and melody as the original theme song. Also in season 10, the show's animation made the transition from traditional animation to Flash animation. The animation for season ten was done by Elliot Animation Studios in Canada, whereas all of the prior seasons were animated by Yeson Animation Studios in South Korea. Sparky was completely absent from season ten (most likely due to generally unfavorable reception from viewers) with no in-universe explanation for his disappearance. Poof was absent throughout most of season 10 as well, but returned in the episode "Certifiable Super Sitter".


== Episodes ==


== Cancelled spin-off series and film ==
In 2004, Hartman revealed his intentions to make a Crash Nebula spin-off series. The pilot episode "Crash Nebula" was aired as part of the show's fourth season. Despite this, Nickelodeon decided not to pick up the episode as a series. However in 2006, Hartman stated that he was still confident and would try to get the spin-off greenlighted in the future. He also wrote a script entitled Crash Nebula: The Movie for Paramount Pictures, but the film was canceled due to its similarities with Disney's Sky High.In 2005 or 2006, Hartman had also considered making a theatrical film adaptation of the series after its initial cancellation in 2006, which was to be produced by Nickelodeon Movies and distributed by Paramount Pictures. The film was to be animated much like the series as well as previous Nickelodeon fare such as the Rugrats film series, The Wild Thornberrys Movie, Hey Arnold!: The Movie and The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie, but the film was scrapped due to a management change at Paramount, despite the script having already been written. Despite this, Hartman expressed interest in releasing the film direct-to-video someday and that the script could also serve for another television film of the show. However, since no new episodes have been aired since July 26, 2017, and production of the show was halted after Hartman left Nickelodeon in early 2018, this seemingly ended any chances of the film happening.


== Home media ==


== Reception ==


=== Critical reception ===
Betsy Wallace from Common Sense Media gave the series 3 of 5 stars saying, “Nickelodeon airs some of the most creative and expertly animated cartoons on television, and it has another winner with The Fairly OddParents.”Dennis Cass from Slate Magazine favorably compared the series' writing to that of Animaniacs and praised the series' broad appeal.


=== Awards and nominations ===


== Merchandise ==


=== Video games ===
Four video games have been released based on the series. The first one, The Fairly OddParents: Enter the Cleft! was released exclusively for the Game Boy Advance on November 6, 2002. The second one, The Fairly OddParents: Breakin' da Rules was released for the Game Boy Advance, GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox, and Windows exclusively in North America on November 3, 2003. The third one, The Fairly OddParents: Shadow Showdown was released for Microsoft Windows, GameCube, PlayStation 2, and Game Boy Advance on September 8, 2004. The fourth game, Fairly Odd Parents: Clash with the Anti-World was released exclusively for the Game Boy Advance on October 17, 2005.The show was featured in most Nicktoons crossover video games, including Nicktoons Basketball released for Windows PCs on September 11, 2004, Nicktoons: Freeze Frame Frenzy for the Game Boy Advance on September 20, 2004, Nicktoons Movin' released for the PlayStation 2 on October 21, 2004, the 2005 video game Nicktoons Unite released for PlayStation 2, Game Boy Advance, GameCube, and Nintendo DS, Nicktoons Winners Cup Racing released for Windows PCs on February 15, 2006, Nicktoons: Battle for Volcano Island released for PlayStation 2, Game Boy Advance, GameCube, and Nintendo DS on October 24, 2006, and Nicktoons: Attack of the Toybots released for Game Boy Advance, PlayStation 2, Wii, and Nintendo DS on October 23, 2007. The show was also featured in an arcade racing game, Nicktoons Nitro, released in 2009.
Timmy Turner and his alter ego, Cleft the Boy Chin Wonder, are playable characters in the 2019 official mobile game, Nickelodeon Super Brawl Universe.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
The Fairly Oddparents at Frederator Studios
Production blog
The Fairly OddParents on IMDb
The Fairly OddParents at the Big Cartoon DataBase
The Fairly OddParents at TV.com