Title: External Data Representation
Aspects: {'XDR'}

External Data Representation (XDR) is a standard data serialization format, for uses such as computer network protocols. It allows data to be transferred between different kinds of computer systems. Converting from the local representation to XDR is called encoding. Converting from XDR to the local representation is called decoding. XDR is implemented as a software library of functions which is portable between different operating systems and is also independent of the transport layer.
XDR uses a base unit of 4 bytes, serialized in big-endian order; smaller data types still occupy four bytes each after encoding. Variable-length types such as string and opaque are padded to a total divisible by four bytes.  Floating-point numbers are represented in IEEE 754 format.


== History ==
XDR was developed in the mid 1980s at Sun Microsystems, and first widely published in 1987.
XDR became an IETF standard in 1995.
The XDR data format is in use by many systems, including:

Network File System (protocol)
ZFS File System
NDMP Network Data Management Protocol
Open Network Computing Remote Procedure Call
Legato NetWorker backup software (later sold by EMC)
NetCDF (a scientific data format)
The R language and environment for statistical computing
The HTTP-NG Binary Wire Protocol
The SpiderMonkey JavaScript engine, to serialize/deserialize compiled JavaScript code
The Ganglia distributed monitoring system
The sFlow network monitoring standard
The libvirt virtualization library, API and UI
The Firebird (database server) for Remote Binary Wire Protocol
Stellar Payment Network


== XDR data types ==
boolean
int – 32-bit integer
unsigned int – unsigned 32-bit integer
hyper – 64-bit integer
unsigned hyper – unsigned 64-bit integer
IEEE float
IEEE double
quadruple (new in RFC1832)
enumeration
structure
string
fixed length array
variable length array
union – discriminated union
fixed length opaque data
variable length opaque data
void – zero byte quantity
optional – optional data is notated similarly to C pointers, but is represented as the data type "pointed to" with a boolean "present or not" flag. Semantically this is option type.


== See also ==
Structured Data eXchange Format (SDXF)
Remote Procedure Call
Abstract Syntax Notation One
Data Format Description Language
Comparison of data serialization formats


== References ==


== External links ==
The XDR standard exists in three different versions in the following RFCs:

RFC 4506 2006 This document makes no technical  changes to RFC 1832 and is published for the purposes of noting IANA considerations, augmenting security considerations, and distinguishing normative from informative references.
RFC 1832 1995 version. Added Quadruple precision floating point to RFC 1014.
Cisco's XDR: Technical Notes
jsxdrapi.c, the main source file of SpiderMonkey that uses XDR
protocol.cpp main xdr source file used in Firebird remote protocol
The GNU Libc implementation of rpcgen, the XDR parser.
Mu Dynamics Research Labs racc grammar for XDR
IvmaiAsn ASN1/ECN/XDR Tools (a collection of tools containing an XDR/RPC-to-ASN.1 converter)