Title: Yaadein (2001 film)
Aspects: {'Yaadein'}

Yaadein (English: Memories) is a 2001 Bollywood musical drama film written, directed, edited and produced by Subhash Ghai. The ensemble cast cross over film starring Hrithik Roshan, Kareena Kapoor, and Jackie Shroff in lead roles, was released worldwide on 27 July 2001 to negative reviews. It was inspired by Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice. Yaadein was a box office disappointment and the first flop for director Subhash Ghai. The soundtrack and background score composed by Anu Malik received positive reviews, and remained a Chartbuster. Jackie Shroff received nomination for Best Performance in a Supporting Role, Male at the 47th Filmfare Awards. Despite its box office failure, the film was profitable due to ancillary revenues of ₹21 crore, including ₹8.2 crore from selling music rights to Tips.The filming took place in locations such as the Cliveden House, which was used as Ronit's family mansion, the  Apex Bar and Restaurant, Radisson Hampshire, the Leicester Square, the Ascot, the King's Arms Pub, the Thames Embankment, the Thorpe Park, the Tower Bridge, the Windsor Great Park, the Windsor and Eton Central railway station, the Windsor Castle, the Piccadilly Circus, the Queensmere Shopping Centre, Slough, in the U.K. The Eagle Square, and Langkawi Yacht Club Langkawi, Malaysia, the Lake Palace Hotel, Udaipur, Rajasthan, and
the Panchkula.


== Plot ==
Raj Singh Puri is best friends with L.K. Malhotra, who is the younger brother of J.K. Malhotra. The brothers are business tycoons and Raj works in their company.
Raj has three daughters. Their mother, Shalini Singh Puri, died in an accident while shopping. The first one, Avantika, gets married through the arrangement. The second one, Sania, marries her lover, even though Raj said the family will not fit with their lifestyle and how they're brought up. The last, Isha, doesn't believe in love. After a few weeks at her in-laws, the second daughter (Sania) returns home asking for a divorce. After this, Raj becomes strictly against love and relationships.
All these changes when Isha falls in love with the heir to the Malhotra empire, Ronit, L.K. Malhotra's son. They ask for Raj's blessings, but he bluntly refuses them. Isha understandingly shuns her relationship with Ronit. Raj arranges for Ronit to be married to the daughter of another tycoon. Isha agrees and makes him promise that he will not do anything and would listen to his parents, but deep down she still has really strong feelings for him. Ronit is unhappy, but still goes along with the promise, and makes Raj realize that his fiancée's family is not right for them. Raj approaches the Malhotras to break off the engagement. J.K. Malhotra shuns him by calling him poor and small. The other Malhotras join forces to make J.K. realize his mistake and Ronit is finally married to Isha. At the end of the movie, Raj is still living in his farmhouse with his daughters, their husbands, and a granddaughter.


== Cast ==


== Soundtrack ==
Music for the film's soundtrack was composed by Anu Malik and lyrics written by Anand Bakshi. The track "Eli re Eli" became a rage soon after release. Subhash Ghai wanted A. R. Rahman to compose for the film, but the latter declined the offer, since he was busy with the work of Bombay Dreams. According to the Indian trade website Box Office India, with 2.2 million units sold, the film's soundtrack album was the year's seventh highest-selling Bollywood music album. Tips, that distributed the album in the market, collected more than ₹6.5 crore from the sales.


== References ==


== External links ==
Yaadein on IMDb
Yaadein at Rotten Tomatoes
Yaadein at Box Office Mojo