Title: Kentaro Yabuki
Aspects: {'Yabuki'}

Kentaro Yabuki (矢吹 健太朗, Yabuki Kentarō, born February 4, 1980) is a Japanese manga artist and illustrator, best known as the creator of Black Cat and co-creator of To Love Ru with Saki Hasemi. His mentor was Takeshi Obata, the illustrator of Death Note, Hikaru no Go and Bakuman.


== Overview ==
Yabuki has stated that everything he learned about drawing manga, he learned from Akira Toriyama's Dragon Ball. He even admitted that his first publication in Jump was not his own work but actually an illustration combining, or rather fusing together, Gohan and Trunks that he sent in to a 1995 contest and won a prize for.His first popular series, Black Cat, was serialized between July 2000  and June 2004 in Weekly Shōnen Jump and later received an anime adaptation by Gonzo. Both were released in North America. Upon its ending, Yabuki expressed desire to make a sequel from the series or make its characters reappear in another work. Since 2004, he has mostly been working as an illustrator to works written by other authors, including To Love Ru and its sequel To Love Ru Darkness alongside Saki Hasemi and Hatena Illusion alongside Tomohiro Matsu.
Yabuki was an extra in the 2003 movie Godzilla: Tokyo S.O.S., running through the streets of Roppongi Hills.


== Works ==
Yamato Gensōki (邪馬台幻想記) (1998 Shueisha)
Jigen Bakuju (時限爆呪) (1999 Shueisha), illustrations only, light novel written by Kaya Kizaki
Black Cat (ブラックキャット, Burakku Kyatto) (2000–2004 Shueisha)
Trans Boy (トランスボーイ) (2004)
To Love Ru (To LOVEる -とらぶる-, To LOVEru -Toraburu-) (with Saki Hasemi; 2006–2009 Shueisha), Illustrator
Mayoi Neko Overrun! (迷い猫オーバーラン!, Mayoi Neko Ovāran!) (with Tomohiro Matsu; 2010 Shueisha), Illustrator
Futagami Double (フタガミ*ダブル, Futagami Daburu) (2010), One-shot
To Love Ru Darkness (To LOVEる -とらぶる- ダークネス, To LOVEru -Toraburu- -Dākunesu-) (with Saki Hasemi; 2010–2017 Shueisha), Illustrator
Nijiyome Gakuen Z-Cune Aoi (にじよめ学園 ズキューーン葵, Nijiyome Gakuen Zukyūn Aoi), Illustrator
Hatena Illusion (はてな☆イリュージョン, Hatena☆Iryūjon) (2014–current Shueisha), illustrations only, light novel written by Tomohiro Matsu
Darling in the Franxx (ダーリン・イン・ザ・フランキス, Dārin In Za Furankisu) (2018–current Shueisha), Illustrator


== References ==


== External links ==
Kentaro Yabuki  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia