Title: Youth Advisory Committee of Cuyahoga County
Aspects: {'YAC'}

The Youth Advisory Committee of Cuyahoga County, (also known as YAC or Youth Advisory Committee) began in 2005, as a joint collaboration between the Cuyahoga County Family and Children First Council and the Cuyahoga County Board of Health. The objectives of the Youth Advisory Committee are to provide youth with opportunities to discuss issues important to them, solicit opinions of peers, serve as youth representatives, and promote youth development. Through participation on Youth Advisory Committee, young people work in partnership with adults to become leaders on issues that matter to them and develop skills that will be useful for the rest of their lives. YAC members are also 4-H members.


== History ==
The YAC begin in 2005. YAC is a diverse group of youth from Cuyahoga County that help to transform existing forums of decision making traditionally reserved for adults. The YAC is committed to creating excellent opportunities for youth to have a strong impact in their county where their voices are encouraged, welcomed, and definitely celebrated.has teams focused on topics important to youth and their communities, which help young people build skills and create positive change. The YAC has completed several community service projects, and taken youth on several trips since beginning in 2005. YAC members took part in a 24-hour camp retreat that focused on key skills such as leadership, team building, and communication. YAC youth traveled to Washington D.C. and had the opportunity to explore, develop, and refine their civic engagement skills to be outstanding leaders on the local, state, and national level. Members participated in a service learning project at Edgewater Park for Global youth Service Day helping to clean up the western end of the park. Youth from YAC participated in a career tour to Ohio State University and explored college life and the unique disciplines of study the university offers. Members rallied the Columbus Statehouse to advocate for key funds needed for youth development in Cuyahoga County. YAC youth attended a Capital Hill briefing in Washington D.C. and urged their respective legislators to support a bill for the creation of a national youth council. YAC youth traveled to North Carolina for a week-long leadership retreat in 2011.


== Leadership Teams ==
YAC currently has six leadership teams, all of which are led by one or two Youth Facilitators and one Adult Facilitator. The Facilitators leads the group and guides other YAC members with current service-learning projects and events that the YAC is planning. Adult Facilitators assist the Youth Facilitators with anything they made need to assure their leadership team is a success.
- Health & Fitness 
- Multimedia  
- Education 
- Service Learning   


== Youth Summit ==
In 2009 the YAC sponsored their first annual Youth Summit entitled "We're Taking Over", at Cleveland State University. The summit had an audience of over 300 youth from within Cuyahoga County. In October 2010, YAC sponsored their second annual Youth Summit, which seen increase in youth participation. In October 2011, YAC sponsored its third annual youth summit at Cleveland State University, entitles "Lending A Helping Hand". Over 400 youth attended the summit, which reached out to youth with disabilities. 
During the Youth Summit, YAC members present workshops to fellow peers about topics and problems teens are facing today. Workshops topics includes: Love is Not Black and Blue, Sex One on One, LGBTQ, I Am Not What I Wear and various other topics. 
Special Guest at the YAC Summit has included: Congresswoman Nina Turner, Invisible Children and Johanna Orozco.


== Diversity ==
YAC is known for prompting diversity. It is currently represented by youth and adults of:

African-American descent
Asian-American descent
Caucasian-American descent
Hispanic-American descentIt is currently represented by youth and adults from the following cities (and many more):

Beachwood
Cleveland
Cleveland Heights
Garfield Heights
Maple Heights
North Olmsted
North Royalton
Shaker Heights
Warrensville HeightsIt is currently represented by youth from the following schools (and many more):

Benedictine High School
Cleveland Central Catholic High School
Euclid High School
High Tech Academy
John Hay High School
John F. Kennedy High School
Maple Heights High School
Saint Ignatius High School
Whitney Young High School


== Sponsors/ Partnership ==
The YAC is currently sponsored by:

The Ohio State University Extension
Cuyahoga County
Cuyahoga County Family & Children First Council
Cuyahoga County Board Health & Developmental Disabilities
4-H


== External links ==
YAC & OSU Site
Official Site