Title: Yalgaar (1992 film)
Aspects: {'Yalgaar'}

Yalgaar is a 1992 Indian Hindi language action film directed by and starring Feroz Khan alongside Sanjay Dutt, Nagma, Kabir Bedi, Manisha Koirala, Mukesh Khanna, Deepti Naval, Neena Gupta And Vicky Arora. Film Was Declared " Hit" At The Box Office.
Two childhood friends grow up to be on the opposite sides of the law. One of them is a crime lord.
Childhood friends became enemies when one Mahendra Ashwini Kumar grows up to be Additional Police Commissioner and the other Raj Pratap Singhal becomes a smuggler. Mahendra have two sons who are also police officers namely Rajesh and Brajesh while on the other hand Singhal is also christened with two sons Vishal who helps develop his dad's business and Vicky who takes up employment in a garage. When Brajesh is killed by one of Mahendra's henchman; Rajesh swears to avenge the death of his brother even if having to take the law into his own hands. After Brajesh's death he leaves behind his widowed wife, Kaushalya and a young daughter, Meghna. On a chance encounter with both Meghna and Vicky both fall in love and the Kumars approve of Vicky as there future son in law unaware of his family background. And then Mahendra is given the post as police Commissioner; unable to bear this Singhal sets up another of his henchman to have Mahendra killed. To escape from the police and public officials Singhal and his family migrates to Dubai further escalating the blood shed between both the families that might continue for years.


== Cast ==
Feroz Khan as Rajesh Ashwini Kumar
Sanjay Dutt as  Vishal Singhaal
Mukesh Khanna as ACP Mahendra Ashwini Kumar
Nagma as Anu Singhaal
Manisha Koirala as Meghna
Nina Gupta - Kaushalya (Brajesh's Wife)
Mohan Bhandari as Inspector Deepak Kaul
Deepti Naval as  Sunita
Kabir Bedi as Raj Pratap Singhaal
Maya Alagh as Bharti Singhaal
Vicky Arora  as Vicky Malhotra/Singhaal
Deep Dhillon as Jagtiani
Vishwajeet Pradhan as Jai Chand
Manjeet Kular as Lily
Pramod Moutho as Press Reporter


== Music ==
"Ho Jata Hai Kaise Pyar Na Jane Koi" - Sapna Mukherjee, Kumar Sanu
"Aakhir Tumhe Aana Hai Jara Der" - Udit Narayan, Sapna Mukherjee
"Koyee Pichhle Janam, Kiye Achchhe Karam" - Udit Narayan, Kavita Krishnamurthy
"Kaunsi Baat Hai Duniya Mein" - Udit Narayan, Kavita Krishnamurthy
"Hai Dil Mein Lagan" - Mohammed Aziz, Nitin Mukesh, Suresh Wadkar
"Dil Dil Dil" (Duet) - Sapna Mukherjee, Channi Singh
"Shahar Me Gaanv Me" - Kumar Sanu
"Teree Chunnee Pe Sitare" - Udit Narayan, Kavita Krishnamurthy


== See also ==
Yalgaar (Pakistan film)


== External links ==
Yalgaar on IMDb


== References ==