Title: Different Light
Aspects: {'A Different Light'}

Different Light is the second studio album by American pop rock band the Bangles, released in January 1986. The album's Top 40 sound was a departure from their earlier 1960s-style rock'n'roll sound. It is their best-known album, with five charting singles, including the Billboard top two hits "Manic Monday" and "Walk Like an Egyptian". It is also the first album in which bassist Michael Steele sings lead vocals on some tracks.
The 2008 reissue CD on the Wounded Bird Records label (WOU 4039) adds a bonus track: "Walk Like an Egyptian (Extended Dance Mix)".
Slant Magazine listed the album at number 78 on its list of "Best Albums of the 1980s".


== Singles ==
Different Light produced five singles, the first three of which were written by someone other than the Bangles. Lead single "Manic Monday", originally written by Prince under the pseudonym "Christopher" in 1984 as a duet for the Apollonia 6 album, peaked at number two in the United Kingdom and the United States in 1986. "If She Knew What She Wants", the second single from Different Light, was originally recorded by Jules Shear on his 1985 Eternal Return album. The song was originally written in the first person, however the Bangles rewrote the lyrics in the third person as they considered it more appropriate; their version charted at number 29 in the United States and number 31 in the United Kingdom. "Walk Like an Egyptian" was written by Liam Sternberg after seeing people on a ferry walking awkwardly to keep their balance as figures do in Ancient Egyptian reliefs; it became one of the most successful singles by the Bangles, hitting number one in the United States, Denmark, and the Netherlands, as well as peaking at number three in the United Kingdom. "Walking Down Your Street" hit number 11 in the United States and number 16 in the United Kingdom, and a fifth single, "Following", was released exclusively in the latter country.


== Album cover variations ==
The covers of the most of the album's US cassette pressings and the sheet music songbook only show 12 (out of 16) of the "different" snapshots, eliminating the third column to best fit the rectangular layout of cassette cases and book.
The back cover of European-made CDs replicates the back cover of the vinyl LP edition, with all 16 snapshots and the track index at the top. The back cover of the US version, however, only shows the first column of four snapshots, with the track index list occupying the rest of the space – a rare deviation for Columbia's CD issues during the 1980s.


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
The BanglesSusanna Hoffs – lead and backing vocals, guitars
Vicki Peterson – lead and backing vocals, guitars
Michael Steele – lead and backing vocals, guitars, bass
Debbi Peterson – lead and backing vocals, drums, percussionAdditional musiciansPrince – all other instruments on "Manic Monday" (uncredited)
Brenda Bennett – backing vocals on "Manic Monday" (uncredited)
Rusty Anderson – additional guitars
Barbara Chapman – harp, additional guitars
Mitchell Froom – keyboards
David Kahne – keyboards
Carlos Vega – additional drums
William Jones – electric sitar (uncredited)


== Production ==
Producer – David Kahne
Engineers – Tchad Blake and Peggy McLeonard
Assistant Engineers – David Glover and Mike Kloster
Mixing – David Leonard
Art Direction – Nancy Donald and Tony Lane
Photography – Raul Vega
Wardrobe - Genny Schorr and Tony Riviera


== Charts ==


== References ==

Additional sources used:

www.aurealm.com/bangdisc.htm (No longer online)


== External links ==
The Bangles official website