Title: C. David Baker
Aspects: {'C. D. Baker'}

C. David Baker serves as the President and CEO of the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio.Under his guidance, he has transformed the Hall of Fame into “The Most Inspiring Place on Earth” that is built around the important mission to "Honor the Heroes of the Game, Preserve its History, Promote its Values & Celebrate Excellence EVERYWHERE!”In his first three years of leadership at the Hall, the organization's net assets grew 161%. He was also instrumental in the inception of Johnson Controls Hall of Fame Village, a nearly $800 million mixed-use development surrounding the Hall of Fame now lead by Hall of Fame Village CEO Michael Crawford.On November 28, 2017, Baker received the prestigious March of Dimes Sports Leadership Award.Baker was the fourth commissioner of the Arena Football League (AFL). He started in the league as the owner of the Anaheim Piranhas, which he left after a single season of owning the team to become commissioner. One of his more imposing features is his size – 6 feet 9 and-a-half inches tall and 400 pounds. He was a power forward at UC-Irvine from 1971–75 and played two seasons of professional basketball in Europe. Later, Baker attended Pepperdine University School of Law where he served as Editor-in-Chief of the Law Review.  He was a City Councilman of Irvine, California. Baker resigned as Arena Football League Commissioner at ArenaBowl XXII, on July 25, 2008 after 11.5 years as commissioner of the AFL.He served as the Managing Partner from 2009 to 2014 for Union Village, an integrated health care village in Henderson, Nevada.On January 2, 2014, he was announced as the President of the Pro Football Hall of Fame.


== Personal life ==
Baker and his wife Colleen reside in Canton, Ohio.
One son, Ben Baker, is a NASCAR executive.  His other son is Sam Baker, the former first round draft pick and left tackle of the Atlanta Falcons.
Baker is a Christian. In comparison to the 40,000 year longevity of the Hall of Fame bronzed busts, Baker has said, “You quickly get to put it in perspective that God’s got a Hall of Fame that will last even longer than 40,000 years.” Baker has also said, “It wasn’t because I was such a good guy or it made me a better guy. Frankly, it was understanding that I’m not a good guy and I’m capable of far worse, and that Jesus Christ died on the cross and rose from the dead to pay for all my sins. It’s not because of what I do. It’s because of what He did for me. ... I am thankful to be a sinner saved by the grace of Jesus Christ, and I’m also thankful to be at the Pro Football Hall of Fame.”


== References ==


== External links ==
2004 interview