Title: D-Girl (The Sopranos)
Aspects: {'D-Girl'}

"D-Girl" is the 20th episode of the HBO original series The Sopranos and the seventh of the show's second season. It was written by Todd A. Kessler and directed by Allen Coulter, and originally aired on February 27, 2000.


== Starring ==
James Gandolfini as Tony Soprano
Lorraine Bracco as Dr. Jennifer Melfi
Edie Falco as Carmela Soprano
Michael Imperioli as Christopher Moltisanti
Dominic Chianese as Corrado Soprano, Jr.*
Vincent Pastore as Pussy Bonpensiero
Steven Van Zandt as Silvio Dante *
Tony Sirico as Paulie Gualtieri *
Robert Iler as Anthony Soprano, Jr.
Jamie-Lynn Sigler as Meadow Soprano
Drea de Matteo as Adriana La Cerva
David Proval as Richie Aprile
Aida Turturro as Janice Soprano
Nancy Marchand as Livia Soprano* = credit only


=== Guest starring ===


== Synopsis ==
Christopher and Adriana meet his cousin Greg and his fiancée Amy Safir. Amy works for Jon Favreau, and they are filming in New York. She has been eager to meet Christopher and read his screenplay; as she says, mob-themed stories are a hit. She is also struck by Christopher as a man. At home, Adriana tells Chris she has kept a copy of the screenplay he threw away, and persuades him to pass it to Jon and Amy. Both Chris and Adriana have been invited to the film set, but he goes alone. He is absorbed by what he sees, and makes a suggestion Jon gratefully adopts.
Jon wants to learn from Chris about mob customs and speech. Chris goes to his hotel room for an arranged meeting but he is not to be disturbed, so he calls on Amy instead. They talk, she begins to give him advice about writing a screenplay, they have sex. Another day, he manages to catch her in the hotel lobby and they go to her room again for sex, but afterwards she is overcome by guilt. In her room Chris finds a screenplay by Jon and sees that he has stolen a mob anecdote that Chris told him in confidence. Furious, Chris searches for him, but he has returned to California. In the following days, Amy does not reply to his messages. He finally tracks her down. She tells him, "It was wrong, with us," and that, for the time being, Hollywood has lost interest in mob films. She turns her back on him. 
A.J. takes his mother's car without permission and damages it. When his parents rebuke him he baffles them by stating that life is absurd, and he does not wish to be  confirmed because there is no God. Tony consults Pussy, who is both A.J.'s godfather and confirmation sponsor; Pussy says that at that age "they get broody." Tony consults Dr. Melfi, who explains that A.J. has discovered existentialism. A.J. consults his grandmother who tells him not to expect happiness; everyone dies alone; "It's all a big nothing."
To his great distress, Pussy is forced by the FBI to wear a wire at A.J.'s confirmation and the ensuing reception at the Soprano home. During the reception, Tony discovers A.J. and two friends smoking marijuana in the garage. Pussy goes up to A.J.'s room, where he is sulking, and gently tells him that his father is a good man; A.J. is young and should enjoy life. He hugs him and sends him back down to the party, but Pussy himself goes into the toilet and sobs.    
Chris misses the confirmation ceremony and arrives late for the reception. Adriana has inadvertently told Tony about the screenplay-writing. Tony tells Chris he has a choice: either to follow his other interests, or to completely commit himself to him. Chris goes out and smokes a cigarette, then goes back to Tony.


== Title reference ==
The episode's title is a shortened title for "development girl", used mostly in the film and television industry.


== Cultural references ==
Christopher refers to the comedy film The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight (film) (1971) when Favreau talks about his passion to make and star in another film about "Crazy Joe Gallo."
Amy reminds Christopher that Mickey Blue Eyes (which starred Vincent Pastore) is an example of another mob movie that failed to live up to its advance billing.
Adriana tells Amy and John that she enjoyed Favreau's film Swingers (1996), with Vince Vaughn.
When Carmela and Tony express concern about AJ's existentialist pronouncements, Meadow quotes Mme de Staël:  "One must choose in life between boredom and suffering.”
Meadow says that A.J. has been assigned The Stranger, a novel by Albert Camus.
When Christopher relates the story of the trans woman whose lover threw acid in her face after becoming intimate and learning that she was actually transsexual, Amy recalls the film, The Crying Game (1992).
Amy relates Maslow's hierarchy of needs to Christopher before becoming intimate with him.
When Amy tells Christopher they were wrong to have begun a relationship and Christopher responds that he really liked her, Amy observes that the mood has become rather "William Inge".


== Music ==
The song played over the end credits is "Vedi, Maria", by Emma Shapplin.
When Chris, John, and Amy sit down at the pizza shop, the song played is "Swingtown" by the Steve Miller Band. It is then followed by "Rhiannon" by Fleetwood Mac.
Other music included in this episode includes "Tasty Pudding" by Chet Baker, "Shaolin Satellite" by Thievery Corporation, "Voulez-Vous?" by Arling & Cameron, and "Caught My Mind" by Pushmonkey.


== References ==


== External links ==
"D-Girl" at HBO
"D-Girl" on IMDb
"D-Girl" at TV.com