Title: D.A.V. College Managing Committee
Aspects: {'D.A.V. College'}

The D.A.V. College Managing Committee, familiarly known as DAVCMC, is a non-governmental educational organisation in India and overseas with over 900  schools, 75 colleges and a university. It is based on the ideals of the religious and social reformer, Swami Dayanand Saraswati. The Dayanand Anglo-Vedic education system also comprises colleges offering graduate and post-graduate degrees in various areas of study all over India.
Founded in 1886 in Lahore by the efforts of Mahatma Hansraj, these schools are run by the Dayanand Anglo-Vedic College Trust and Management Society, also commonly known as the Dayanand Anglo-Vedic Education Society. It holds the record for producing the largest number of CBSE (class Xth and XIIth) toppers as a single institution in the last 10 years. Today, institutional records of the D.A.V. College Trust and Management Society are part of the archives at the Nehru Memorial Museum & Library, at Teen Murti House, Delhi.English is the primary language of instruction, with students also receiving compulsory education in Hindi and Sanskrit or a regional language. Presently, the DAV movement has grown to become the single largest non-governmental educational society in the country, managing 750+ educational institutions, apart from D.A.V. Public Schools spread over the country and even in foreign lands, with an annual budget of more than INR ₹2 billion. It employs 50,000+ people and educates more than 20 lakh students every year.
In 2013,The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) awarded 40 institutions for its exemplary contribution to quality education for an employable workforce to harness its demographic dividend and to cater the need of industry. ASSOCHAM awarded DAV College Managing Committee  with 'Best Chain of Schools in India' award.


== History ==
Lala Lajpat Rai was among the founders of the national D.A.V. College Managing Committee. 1885 the first DAV School was established at Lahore which was subsequently upgraded to become the first DAV College. In 1886 the DAV College Trust and Management Society was established and registered. The DAV Society visualized that the DAV Schools shall produce men and women of sterling national character and social commitment. The commendable objectives of the DAV attracted several committed individuals and groups to serve the society by striving to collect petty donations and gather humble resources to set up DAV Schools to spread Maharishi's message for enlightening all the Indians. Thus the crusade against ignorance, illiteracy, injustice and inequality was revived and it gained further momentum with the opening of each DAV School.


== University ==
DAV University, Jalandhar
DAV Women's University, Yamunanagar


== Colleges ==
There are more than 75 colleges across India for graduate and post-graduate programmes.


=== Professional colleges ===
Under DAV
University of Delhi
PGDAV College, Delhi
Hansraj College, Delhi
College of Education
Sohan Lal DAV College of Education, Ambala, Haryana
Dr.Ganesh Dass DAV college of Education for Women, Karnal, Haryana
BN Saha DAV Teacher's Training College, Giridih, Jharkhand
DPB Dayanand College of Education, Solapur, Mahashtra
DAV College of Education, Abohar, Punjab
DAV College of Education for Women,outside Beri Gate, Amritsar, Punjab
Jialal B.Ed College, Ramganj, Beawer Road, Ajmer, Rajasthan
MCM DAV college, Kangra,  Himachal Pradesh
Law
Dayanand Law College, Solapur, Mahashtra
Medical, Ayurveda, Dental, Pharmacy and Physiotherapy
DAV Edwardganj Hospital, Malout, Punjab
Dayanand Ayurvedic College, Jalandhar, GT Road, Jalandhar, Punjab
Mahatma Hans Raj DAV Institute of Nursing, Mahatma Hans Raj Marg,  Jalandhar, Punjab
JN Kapoor DAV Centenary Dental College, Model Town, Yamuna Nagar, Haryana
MN DAV Dental College, Tatul, Solan, Himachal Pradesh
TDTR DAV Institute of Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation Professor Colony, Yamuna Nagar, Haryana
DAV Institute of Physiotherapy & Rehabilitation, GT Road, Jalandhar, Punjab
Km. Vimla Memorial DAV Physio Centre & Gym, Chheharta, Amritsar, Punjab
DAV Pharmacy College, Mahatma Hans GT Road, Jalandhar City, Punjab
Management
DAV Institute of Management, NH-III, NIT, Faridabad, Haryana
DAV Centre for Management Development in Agriculture & Environment, N-4/16, Civil Township, Rourkela, Odisha
DAV School of Business Management, Unit-8, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
DAV Institute of Management Studies & Research, Pune, Maharashtra
Engineering and Technology
NMDC DAV Polytechnic, Old Central School Building, Dantewada, Chhattisgarh
DAV College of Engg. & Technology, Kanina, Mohindergarh, Haryana
DAV Institute of Engineering & Technology Betla Road, Medininagar, Daltonganj, Palamau, Jharkhand
DAV Institute of Engineering & Technology, Kabir Nagar, Mahatma Hans Raj Marg, Jalandhar, Punjab
Mehr Chand Polytechnic College, Dayanand Nagar, GT Road, Jalandhar, Punjab
Mehr Chand Technical Institute, Dayanand Nagar, GT Road, Jalandhar, Punjab
Dayanand Junior Technical School, Dayanad Nagar, GT Road, Jalandhar, Punjab
Industrial Training
NMDC Ltd. DAV Industrial Training Center, Bhansi, Dantewada, Chhattisgarh
NMDC - DAV ITC Nagarnagar, Jagdalpur, Bastar, Chhattisgarh
Dayanand Industrial Training Institute Katra Sher Singh, Amritsar, Punjab


== Aided schools ==

There are over 62 government-aided DAV schools across the country which are being run by DAVCMC in co-operation with six state (Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, New Delhi, Orissa and Punjab) and Chandigarh union territory governments.


== Unaided Schools ==
There are more than 800 Not-for-profit Charitable trust run unaided DAV schools across India and several other countries for studies up to the higher secondary level.


== DAV institutes outside India ==


=== Colleges ===
Fiji
DAV College, Ba, Ba (town)
DAV College, Suva, Nabua, Suva
Mauritius
D.A.V. College, Saint André
Dr. Jugroo Seegobin D.A.V. College, Port Louis


=== Schools ===
Singapore
D.A.V. Hindi School, Singapore, Syed Alwi Road, Little India
Nepal
DAV Sushil Kedia Vishwa Bharati Higher Secondary, Kathmandu, Nepal
D.A.V. Dedraj Sewal Devi Todi Higher Secondary School, Biratnagar
United Kingdom
Dayanand Anglo Vedic Primary School, Birmingham
United States of America
DAV Montessori School, Houston, established in 2000


== Related educational institutes ==
These Arya Samaj educational institutes are not under the DAV College Managing Committee.

Gurukul Kangri Vishwavidyalaya
GNA University
Dayanand Industrial Training Institute Katra Sher Singh, Amritsar, Punjab


== See also ==
Akhara
Ekal Vidyalaya
Gurukula


== References ==