Title: Angela D'Amore
Aspects: {"D'Amore"}

Angela D'Amore (born 10 October 1971), a former Australian politician, was a member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly, representing the electorate of Drummoyne  from 2003 until 2011.


== Background and early years ==
D'Amore is the daughter of immigrants, who migrated from Italy in 1964. She was educated at Bethlehem College, Ashfield and the University of Sydney and was an officer for the Municipal Employees Union and the NSW Nurses’ Association.


== New South Wales state politics ==
D'Amore was elected at the 2003 NSW general election. In March 2010, D'Amore was appointed Parliamentary Secretary Assisting the Minister for Police and Parliamentary Secretary Assisting the Minister for Climate Change and Environment in the Kristina Keneally Labor government.
D'Amore's previous parliamentary experience includes:
Chair of the Committee on the Office of the Ombudsman and Police Integrity Commission. 2007 - 2008
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Women’s Representative for Australia
Deputy Chair of Committee of the International Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Women’s SteeringD'Amore proposed major infrastructure changes in the area, such as the M4 east and Iron Cove Bridge widening.. It was claimed that the widening would complement D'Amore's announcement of securing 400 new bus services in March 2010. The M4 East extension is aimed at channelling traffic underground, easing pressure on surface roads, to get Sydney buses running on time effectively and efficiently. D'Amore has noted that the tunnel would be a major public transport outcome for the Inner West.On 22 September 2010, it was revealed that D'Amore was under investigation by ICAC relating to the implementation of a 2006 draft guideline. The matter was in relation to whether relief officers worked in parliament house or at the Drummoyne electorate office.
The relief officers had worked the correct days, on the correct rate of pay and undertook the correct duties but had undertaken their electorate duties in Parliament house rather than the Drummoyne electorate office. Further, the NSW Parliament Employee Services Manager stated during the investigation, the relief officers forms had been amended and approved by Parliament as they were in the 'spirit of the draft guideline'. Subsequently, Ms D'Amore was not made aware by Parliament that relief officers had not completed forms correctly. Despite this on 7 December 2010, the ICAC made adverse findings against D'Amore and was of the opinion that the advice of the NSW Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) should be sought in relation to prosecuting D'Amore. D'Amore stated she was appalled at the findings and parliamentary colleagues openingly stated that she had been unfairly targeted by the ICAC. She remained a Labor member until the NSW state election in 2011. In late 2013 the DPP advised the ICAC that there was insufficient evidence to support a criminal prosecution of D'Amore based on ICAC's adverse findings. The DPP's advice was accepted by the ICAC.


== References ==