Title: Dandelion and burdock
Aspects: {'D&B (disambiguation)'}

Dandelion and burdock is a beverage consumed in the British Isles since the Middle Ages. It was originally a type of light mead, but over the years has evolved into the carbonated soft drink commercially available today. Traditionally it was made from fermented dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) and burdock (Arctium lappa) roots, hence the name.


== History ==
Dandelion and burdock shares an historical origin with a number of drinks originally made from lightly fermented root extracts, such as root beer and sarsaparilla, supposedly as a health benefit. One story regarding its origin is that in the 13th century St. Thomas Aquinas, after a hard night's praying, stumbled out in the dawn and "trusting in God to Provide" brewed a concoction from the first two plants he encountered. According to the literary scholar Natasha Simonova, however, this is an urban legend invented by Cambridge students, and subsequently embedded across the internet by journalistic citation of Wikipedia.The dominant flavour in these other drinks is usually sassafras or wintergreen, both now derived artificially rather than from the plant itself, in part because during the 1960s safrole, the major component of the volatile oil of sassafras, was found to be carcinogenic in rats when administered in relatively large doses. All of these drinks, while tasting similar, do have their own distinct flavour. Dandelion and burdock is most similar in flavour to sarsaparilla. The drink has recently seen an increase in popularity after previously poor sales.


== Imitations and variants ==
The "dandelion and burdock" drink for sale in many retail outlets rarely contains either plant. The retail drink is often carbonated, containing artificial sweeteners and flavourings. Some supermarkets sell the drink with "real plant extracts" with a more faithful flavour than the ones made with artificial flavourings.
Ben Shaw from Huddersfield,uk. Established in 1871. Produce 5 flavours Dandelion & Burdock, cloudy lemonade, bitter shandy  cream soda and root beer.
Fentimans, a beverage company based in the United Kingdom, offers a version of the naturally brewed dandelion and burdock drink, containing extracts of both plants (although its main ingredients are sugar and pear juice concentrate).
A.G. Barr, famous for Scottish soft drink Irn-Bru, produce a version of dandelion and burdock under the name D'n'B and the slogan "Tall, dark and drinksome".
The last of the UK's original temperance bars, Fitzpatrick's in Rawtenstall, which opened in 1890, still produces its dandelion and burdock to an original recipe brought over from Ireland at the end of the 19th century.


== In culture ==
Mentioned in the title track for Suck It and See (2011) by Sheffield indie rock band Arctic Monkeys.Mentioned in Gail Honeyman’s 2017 fictional book titled Eleanor Oliphant is Completely Fine.
Mentioned in Stephen Fry's 1997 autobiography Moab is My Washpot.


== See also ==

Dandelion tea
List of brand name soft drinks products
List of soft drink flavours


== References ==


== Bibliography ==