Title: Blue Line (Los Angeles Metro)
Aspects: {'E-line'}

The A Line (formerly the Blue Line; also known as A Line (Blue)) is a 22.0-mile (35.4 km) light rail line running north-south between Los Angeles and Long Beach, California, passing through Downtown Los Angeles, South Los Angeles, Watts, Willowbrook, Compton, Rancho Dominguez and Long Beach in Los Angeles County. It is one of six lines in the Metro Rail system. Opened in 1990, it is the system's oldest and third busiest line with an estimated 22.38 million boardings per year as of December 2017. It is operated by the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority.The A Line passes near the cities of Vernon, Huntington Park, South Gate, Lynwood, and Carson. The famous Watts Towers can be seen from the train near 103rd Street station. The under-construction Regional Connector will directly link this line to Union Station and beyond.


== Service description ==


=== Route ===
The Metro A Line runs 22.0 miles (35.4 km) between Downtown Los Angeles and Downtown Long Beach making stops at 22 stations.The line's northern terminus is the underground 7th Street/Metro Center station, after rising to street level, trains run south along Flower Street, sharing tracks with the E Line. Passengers can connect to the Metro Silver Line bus rapid transit line at 7th Street/Metro Center, Pico, and Grand stations. The A and E Lines diverge at Flower Street and Washington Boulevard just south of downtown Los Angeles. Here the A Line turns east on Washington Boulevard before turning south on Long Beach Avenue where it enters the former Pacific Electric right-of-way. This historic rail corridor has four tracks, two are used by A Line trains and two are used by freight trains. There are some elevated sections as this private right of way cuts through more densely populated areas. Passengers can connect with the Metro Green Line at approximately midway through the rail corridor as it passes under Interstate 105 at Willowbrook station. Just south of Willow station, A Line trains exit the rail corridor and follows Long Beach Boulevard into the city of Long Beach, where trains travel through the Long Beach Transit Mall while making a loop using 1st Street, Pacific Avenue and 8th Street.


=== Hours of operation ===
Trains run between approximately 4:45 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. the following morning. On Friday and Saturday evenings, trains are extended until 2:00 a.m. of the following morning. First and last train times are as follows:
To/From Long Beach

Northbound
First Train to 7th Street/Metro Center: 4:46 a.m.
Last Train to 7th Street/Metro Center: 12:03 a.m. (2:07 a.m. on Friday and Saturday evenings)Southbound
First Train to Long Beach: 5:00 a.m.
Last Train to Long Beach: 1:01 a.m. (2:05 a.m. on Friday and Saturday evenings)Of note, some trains operate at later or earlier times due to the A Line making the turnaround in Downtown Long Beach.


=== Headways ===
Trains on the A Line operate every six minutes during peak hours Monday through Friday.  They operate every twelve minutes during the daytime weekdays and all day on the weekends after approximately 9 a.m. (with a 15-minute headway early Saturday and Sunday mornings).  Night service consists of ten-minute headways.
During peak hours, every other train serves only the stations between Willow and 7th Street/Metro Center to decrease the headway on that portion of the route. Willow was chosen because of its proximity to the A Line storage yard and because it is the last southbound station with a park-and-ride lot. In the evening rush hour, riders will see some trains destined to "Willow" and others to "Long Beach". Consequently, those riders destined to Long Beach must exit at Willow Station and wait for the next train which will terminate at Downtown Long Beach Station. This was discontinued after the New Blue Improvements Project was complete.


=== Ridership ===
When the A Line began operation in 1990 as the Blue Line, it was projected to have a daily ridership of 5,000. However, it performed much better than expected with daily ridership reaching 12,000 passengers within the first months of service and reaching 32,000 by the end of the first year of service.As of October 2018, the A Line had an average weekday ridership of 63,008, and Saturday and Sunday boardings of 30,579 and 30,314, respectively. In 2017, the line saw a total of 22.38 million boardings.


== History ==
Much of the current A Line follows the route of streetcar service operated by Pacific Electric Railway; service on the route ended in 1961. The current line opened on Saturday, July 14, 1990, at a cost of US$877 million.; the next year it was extended to the Financial District and Downtown Long Beach. An intended extension to Pasadena was scrapped after the 1998 county ballot was approved which banned the use of sales tax revenue for subway projects, preventing construction of a downtown light rail tunnel.The line was originally operated by two-car trains, but proved more popular than expected and 19 platforms were lengthened to accommodate three-car trains in 2002-2003 at a cost of US$11 million. Between 2014 and 2019, the New Blue project extensively renovated the line, climaxing in a year-long period during 2019 when much of the line was closed. Upon reopening, the line was renamed the A Line. Metro also refers to the line as A Line (Blue) in certain contexts.


== Future developments ==


=== Regional Connector Transit Project ===

Metro is currently constructing the Regional Connector, a light rail subway tunnel in Downtown Los Angeles that will connect the A and E Lines to the Gold Line and allow a seamless one-seat ride between the A and E Lines' current terminus at 7th Street/Metro Center and Union Station. When this project is completed, the A, E, and Gold Lines will be simplified into the following:
A Line (colored blue)
Northeastern half of the Gold Line (north of Little Tokyo) will serve as an extension to current A Line
Due to become the world's longest light rail line at 49 mi (79 km) long, surpassing the 42 mi (68 km) Coast Tram in Belgium
Gold Line Foothill Extension will also be absorbed under the A Line, extending it further to Montclair upon completion
E Line (recolored from aqua to gold)
Southern half of Gold Line to East L.A. will be absorbed under current E Line (Expo)
It will not connect to Union StationThe groundbreaking for the construction of the Regional Connector Transit Corridor took place on September 30, 2014, and it is expected to be in public service in 2022.


== Current issues ==


=== Capacity limits ===

The line often operates at capacity, and various options to increase capacity have been considered, such as four-car trains or more frequent trains. Both have problems: it would be difficult or impossible to lengthen some of the station platforms, and the number of trains already causes delays for other vehicles at level crossings. Thus it may not be possible to increase A Line ridership without an extremely expensive grade-separation project, either by elevation, by an entrenchment method similar to that used by the nearby Alameda Corridor freight rail "expressway", or by building another parallel transit corridor to relieve capacity strains from the A Line. When the Regional Connector project linking A and Expo Line tracks with the Gold Line tracks in Little Tokyo is completed, this may result in even more capacity problems, with ridership expected to grow even more once the connector is open for service.


=== Safety at level crossings ===

Over 120 motorists and pedestrians have been killed at A Line level crossings since 1990 and there have been more than 800 collisions, making the line easily the country's deadliest and most collision-prone rail line.

In 1998, the MTA commissioned Booz Allen Hamilton, Inc. to evaluate the cause of Blue Line collisions and recommend affordable solutions. The study reported the high ridership (over 70,000 per day) was a contributor:

"The MBL has one of the highest ridership counts for light rail lines in the Country. This factor is perhaps the most important contributor to the grade crossing accident rate. The high ridership results in increased pedestrian traffic near stations as compared to other light rail systems. In addition, although MTA Operations does not allow high passenger loads dictate safe operations, there is pressure to maintain travel times and headway schedule requirements (e.g., passenger trip from Los Angeles to Long Beach in less than one hour)."Other identified contributing factors were the high local population density that leads to more pedestrian and vehicular traffic around the tracks, diverse varied socio-economic community around the line that creates literacy and language difficulties for public education campaigns, driver frustration due to the slow traffic speeds around the line that leads to more risk taking behavior, and the shared right-of-way with freight traffic in the fastest running section from Washington station to Willow station, where trains operate at a maximum of 55 mph (89 km/h) between stations.
The collision rate has declined somewhat following the installation of four-quadrant gates at some crossings where the A Line shares the right-of-way with freight rail between Washington station and Del Amo station. The gates prevent drivers from going around lowered gates. In addition, cameras along some problem intersections issue traffic tickets when drivers go around gates.


== Station listing ==
The following is the complete list of stations, from north to south.


== Operations ==
On Metro Rail Operations' internal timetables, the A Line is called line 801.


=== Maintenance facilities ===
The A Line is operated out of the Division 11 Yard (208th Street Yard) located at 4170 East 208th Street. This yard stores the fleet used on the A Line. It is also where heavy maintenance is done on the fleet. The Yard is located between Del Amo and Wardlow stations. Trains get to this yard via a wye junction on the southbound tracks. Northbound trains can enter and exit the yard via the cross tracks on the north and south side of the junction.


=== Rolling stock ===
The A Line uses three different types of rolling stock from Nippon Sharyo, Siemens, and Kinkisharyo.
When the Blue Line first opened in 1990, the line had 54 Nippon Sharyo P865 light rail vehicles, numbered 100-153. These cars wore a unique livery consisting of several blue stripes and a single red stripe, reflecting the Blue Line's color designation and its Pacific Electric Red Car heritage.
In 2000, Metro transferred all 15 Nippon Sharyo P2020 light rail vehicles from the Green Line to the Blue Line fleet. These light rail vehicles were nearly identical to the older P865 model, but were about five years newer.In 2012, Metro transferred some Siemens P2000 light rail vehicles from the Gold Line to the Blue Line fleet.
In 2017, the Blue Line received 78 Kinkisharyo P3010 light rail vehicles, the first new fleet of vehicles for the line since it opened in 1990. As the P3010 fleet was introduced, Metro gradually retired all of the remaining P865 light rail vehicles, the original vehicles used on the line.
A Line vehicles are maintained and stored at the Division 11 yard in Long Beach between Del Amo and Wardlow stations. This facility has capacity for storing and maintaining 86 light rail cars.


== Incidents ==
On December 22, 2006, a Metro Blue Line train crashed into a fire truck. The fire truck was on its way to an emergency.
On January 26, 2007, a 14-year-old boy named Lavert Baker, Jr. was killed on his way walking home from school by a Blue Line train that was carrying his closest sister.
In September 13, 2008 a Blue Line train struck a Metro bus on one of the tracks; 15 people were injured. A mechanic was taking the bus on a test run and was not injured. This incident happened only one week after the 2008 Chatsworth train collision in which 25 people died following a head-on collision between a Metrolink train and a freight train.
In July 2010, a Blue Line train which reportedly ran a red light struck a police cruiser on 16th Street & Long Beach Boulevard.
In the same month eight people were injured, six of whom were aboard the bus when a Blue Line train collided with another Metro bus at Broadway and Washington Boulevard.


== In popular culture ==
In Lethal Weapon 3, Martin Riggs (Mel Gibson) jumps onto a departing Blue Line train at 7th Street/Metro Center. Hanging onto the windshield, he tells the driver to speed up after Jack Travis (Stuart Wilson), who is riding in a hijacked hi-rail truck. Riggs and Travis exchange gunfire as they exit the tunnel, but the train stops at Pico station, forcing Riggs to temporarily continue on foot. This would be the first major film to feature the Metro Rail.
At the opening of the Blue Line, an exclusive VHS tape starring the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles was given out for free. In it, the Turtles work to promote the new train line.
In Training Day, as the 2 main characters are driving through South Central Los Angeles next to the Blue Line tracks, a train can be heard sounding off its horn right before it passes them in the opposite direction. Shortly afterwards, another Blue Line train can be seen on an elevated bridge.
In the 2003 remake of The Italian Job, the main characters drive their BMW Mini Coopers into the 7th Street / Metro Center station, standing in for the Hollywood/Highland Red Line Station, and are nearly hit by a Blue Line train. The character Lyle cuts all power to the station, stopping the trains.
In Heat, the movie opens with Neil McCauley (Robert De Niro) getting off a train at Firestone station. A Blue Line train is also featured on the movie poster.
The final scene of Collateral takes place on the Blue Line, starting at 7th Street/Metro Center and then heading south.
In White Men Can't Jump, a Blue Line train can be seen.
In The Purge: Anarchy, the main characters attempt to elude roving gangs of marauders by descending into a Blue Line subway line entrance. While walking down the tracks in the subway tunnel they are pursued by marauders on dune buggies. The two groups exchange heavy gunfire and the pursuers are destroyed when one of the vehicles overturns and explodes in flame.
In Captain Marvel, a fictionalized version of the Blue Line serves as the scene of a pursuit with Captain Marvel (then known as Vers) chasing a Skrull who takes multiple forms. One form includes an elderly woman, whom Vers punches and fights inside the train. The Skrull later shapeshifts into a middle-aged man, whom she fights on the roof. Meanwhile, Fury and Coulson pursue Vers but lose her as the train heads underground.


== References ==


== External links ==

Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority
Blue Line homepage
Blue Line schedule
Blue Line connections overview
A History of the Blue Line: A Light Rail Success Story by the Transit Coalition
Killing Time on the Ghetto Blue from the LA Weekly
Delivery of The First Metro Blue Line Vehicle