Title: Tricolored heron
Aspects: {'E. tricolor'}

The tricolored heron (Egretta tricolor), formerly known as the Louisiana heron, is a small species of heron that is native to coastal parts of the Americas. In the Atlantic region in ranges from northeastern United States, south along the coast, through the Mexican Gulf and the Caribbean, to northern South America as far south as Brazil. In the Pacific region it ranges from Peru to California, but it is only a non-breeding visitor to the far north.
Tricolored herons breed in swamps and other coastal habitats. It nests in colonies, often with other herons, usually on platforms of sticks in trees or shrubs. In each clutch, 3–7 eggs are typically laid.
This species measures from 56 to 76 cm (22 to 30 in) long and has a wingspan of 96 cm (38 in). The slightly larger male heron weighs 415 g (14.6 oz) on average, while the female averages 334 g (11.8 oz). It is a medium-large, long-legged, long-necked heron with a long pointed yellowish or greyish bill with a black tip. The legs and feet are dark.
Adults have a blue-grey head, neck, back and upperwings, with a white line along the neck. The belly is white. In breeding plumage, they have long blue filamentous plumes on the head and neck, and buff ones on the back.
The tricolored heron stalks its prey in shallow or deeper water, often running as it does so. It eats fish, crustaceans, reptiles, and insects.


== Gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		
		


== References ==
Notes
SourcesHilty, Steven L. (2003). Birds of Venezuela. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-7136-6418-5.
Field Guide to the Birds of North America. National Geographic. ISBN 0-7922-6877-6.
Stiles, F. Gary; Skutch, Alexander F. (1989). A Guide to the Birds of Costa Rica. Comstock Publishing Associates. ISBN 0-8014-9600-4.


== External links ==
Tricolored Heron - Egretta tricolor - USGS Patuxent Bird Identification InfoCenter
Tricolored heron photos at Field Guide: Birds of the World on Flickr
Tricolored heron Bird Sound at Florida Museum of Natural History
"Tricolored heron media". Internet Bird Collection.
Tricolored heron photo gallery at VIREO (Drexel University)
Tricolored Heron species account at Neotropical Birds (Cornell Lab of Ornithology)