Title: E postcode area
Aspects: {'E18', 'E9', 'E13', 'E17', 'E11', 'E6', 'E12', 'E20', 'E15'}

The E (Eastern) postcode area, also known as the London E postcode area, is the part of the London post town covering much of the east of Greater London, England as well as Sewardstone, Essex.  It borders the N postcode area to the west, equally north of the tidal Thames. Since closure of the East London mail centre its mail is sorted at Romford Mail Centre as for IG and RM postcode areas.


== Postal administration ==
The current E postcode area was originally formed in 1866 as a merger of the E and NE areas, which had been created in 1858. In 1917, the postal districts were numbered alphabetically by their most important parish, chapelry, topographical or built environment feature. As of 2004, the district names do not form part of the postal address. High demand caused sector 9 of the E1 postcode district to be split and recoded in 1999 to create an E1W postcode district around Wapping, but the rest of the district did not gain an additional character. When districts are used for purposes other than the sorting of mail, such as use as a geographic reference and on street signs, E1 and E1W continue to be commonly classed as one 'district'. The E postcode area contains two non-geographic postcode districts for high-volume business users, E77 and E98.The Eastern District Office is on Whitechapel Road and was the eastern terminus for the former London Post Office Railway, which has been mothballed since 2003. The railway ran 10.5 kilometres (6.5 mi) to the Paddington Head District Sorting Office.
The E20 postcode has been used fictionally in television soap-opera EastEnders since 1985. It has been a real postcode since 2011 carved from and only bordered by the E15 postcode, its buildings marketed as and often self-identifying as Olympic Park and Queen Elizabeth Park - in pre-Victorian times in the parish lands of Essex market town Stratford (in national works then often disambiguated from others for centuries as Stratford-le-Bow).  It includes landmark sports venues built for the 2012 Summer Olympics.


=== List of postcode districts ===
The approximate coverage of the postcode districts, with the historic postal district names in italics, is as follows:


== Boundaries ==
The E1 postcode district has a River Thames frontage to the south and is central to London. Postcode districts E6, E14 and E16 also have river frontages in the south. The River Roding and the North Circular Road form part of the boundary in the east. The postcode area is roughly the combined area of the London Boroughs of Tower Hamlets, Newham and Waltham Forest. Also, the eastern part of the London Borough of Hackney, the western sections of the London Boroughs of Redbridge (E11, E12, E18) and Barking and Dagenham (E6) and a small part of the Epping Forest District, Essex (E4), are within the postcode area.


== In popular culture ==
The 1990s pop band East 17, formed in Walthamstow, whose postcode district is E17.


== Map ==

The postcode area excludes parts of East London like the following:

Central areas covered by central London EC postcodes.
Hoxton in Shoreditch is part of the N postcode area but is usually seen as being part of the East End.
The eastern suburbs built after the introduction of the E postcode area are now mainly in the IG and RM postal areas.


== See also ==

Postcode Address File
List of postcode areas in the United Kingdom
London postal district
North East (London sub region)


== References ==


== External links ==
Royal Mail's Postcode Address File
A quick introduction to Royal Mail's Postcode Address File (PAF)