Title: E24 (TV channel)
Aspects: {'E24'}

E24 (or commonly E24 Bollywood) is an Indian cable television and satellite network, owned by BAG Films & Media Limited.


== History ==
The film industry is the staple entertainment diet for millions in India and abroad. The appeal of Indian cinema is universal and the glitz and glamour of Bollywood have dazzled the world for almost a century. There are several channels on  air featuring aspects of the Indian film industry. Despite a huge demand, however, there was no channel with dedicated 24-hour programming on news about Bollywood. In spite of the growing clout of Bollywood, there was no channel with its finger on the industry’s pulse. And so, the avid couch potato did not really have a 360 degree perspective of Bollywood.
Keeping this vacuum in mind, BAG Films launched E24, Bollywood's No. 1 Channel, in March 2008, under the Broadcast 24 umbrella. Modern, interactive, informative and passionate, the channel reports the glitz and glamour of Bollywood with honesty, zeal and commitment. Films, music, entertainment reviews, gossip, scoops and scandals- the channel features all such programmes in unique style and looks.
Bollywood Reporter,Its Controversial, Filmy Café, E Special and One Day One Life are some key programmes of E24 that easily qualify as channel drivers. These programmes have done consistently well since the launch.
E24 will benefit from the well-established distribution network as well as the news gathering infrastructure of its older sibling, News 24. The mandate for E24 is speed, accuracy and authenticity in reporting, while retaining the mystique and romance of all things Bollywood.
E24’s editorial and creative teams are powered by top-of-the-line television professionals, with years of training and experience.
The sets for E24 are contemporary in look and a functional combination of live + 3D sets that form an integral part of the programming and are in sync with the shows, rather than lending pure aesthetic value. The designs reflect the glamour, glitz and romance that embody the entertainment world, and make it come alive in an intelligent manner, devoid of unnecessary sensationalism, using the platform of news delivery.
However, this is just the beginning. The channel strives to showcase Bollywood with innovative content, presented in its very own unique style to give its viewers the daily dose of Bollywood- 24 hours a day, seven days a week.


== Programming ==
Aawaz de kahan Hai
Its Controversial
Dil se Dil tak
Golden Era
U me aur TV
Bheja Fry
Bollywood Dhamaal
Bollywood Reporter
Bollywood Tambola
Bollywood 20 20
Bollywood ka super Train
Chatty with Katty
Confessions
Dance 10
E-Special
E24 Review Show
Fresh Maal
Gold Safe
Hit List
Hitz Start
Love Byte
Star Shake


== References ==