Title: Florencia 13
Aspects: {'F13'}

The Florencia 13, or Florence Street Gang, is an American criminal street gang based in Los Angeles, California, composed mainly of Hispanic-Americans. The gang is named after the Florence area of Los Angeles County; the 13 stands for its allegiance to the Mexican Mafia. They are involved in drug smuggling, murder, assault and robbery.


== History ==
After the zoot suit riots(1943) many Mexican parents realized that the "eastside" or "el este" which consisted of Boyle Heights and East L.A. had a serious gang problem. In an attempt to take their kids away from the violence they started moving to the Southside. There was already a few established varrios in south central like 38st, 22nd st and Santa Barbara Avenue(aka SBA later KBS). These parents went further into south central and started to settle on 59th st. By the late 40's the little brothers of the Eastside gang members began to form "La Florencia" or "Lil Florence." They formed to protect themselves from the African gangs that were outnumbering them. They became a neighborhood patrol not only to protect themselves but to protect their parents since they were getting mugged a lot. By the early 50's they were spread out throughout the whole Florence district. 
In the late 50's Florencia began to use the 13. It was the first street gang to use it but it was not for their affiliation to the Mexican Mafia. The 13 was used to identify that they crazy on refer or "Marijuana". A few gangs began to use it for the same purposes after them. 
They began to gain a fierce reputation for fighting and being aggressive. Being outnumbered all the time by the black gangs and still holding their own made them strong and their notoriety reached the eastside. 
In juvenile hall by the fifties they were known as fierce fighters that wouldn't back down from the other racial gangs. This made them good recruits for LA Eme. 
Between the late 1940s up until the riots of 1992 they were the minority compared to the black gangs so they always played a role of being the neighborhood patrol apart from gang banging. 
The FBI began targeting Florencia 13 gang members for their roles in attacking African-Americans. According to the FBI, "The jury heard testimony that F13 members indiscriminately targeted African-Americans who were seen in their neighborhoods."At certain times, Florencia 13 leaders ordered killings of the East Coast Crip gang, according to Los Angeles County Sheriff Lee Baca.


== Operation Joker’s Wild ==
In 2007, 102 members of Florencia 13 were listed in indictments, which was named Operation Joker's Wild. This led to the biggest gang raid in American history at this time, with 96 of the 102 of the members being taken into custody by the LAPD. The indictments included charges of drug trafficking, attempted murder, murder and extortion.


== References ==


== External links ==
Southside Florencia (F13) in Florence