Title: F110-class frigate
Aspects: {'F110'}

The F110 class are a new class of future Aegis combat system frigates of the Spanish Navy. The project is being developed by the Ministry of Defence and the public company Navantia. The construction of the frigates will begin in 2019 and are scheduled to be delivered between 2025 and 2031.


== Project history ==
The origins of the F110 class are the planned replacement of Spanish Navy Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigates, that resulted in ALTAMAR Plan (Spanish naval plan to modernize the Spanish Navy), with five F110-class frigates as an enlarged version of the Álvaro de Bazán-class frigates. This idea was discarded.
On 23 December 2011, the Ministry of Defence adjudicated to Indra and Navantia the design of an integrated mast for € 2 million and in 2015, both companies accorded to develop the mast's and the ship's systems. For this project, both companies created a consortium called Protec 110 and was also financed by the Ministry of Industry, Energy and Tourism (now Ministry of Energy, Tourism and Digital Agenda and Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness).
On 27 June 2017, the fleet admiral said that the Navy hopes the project will be approved by the end of 2017 or by 2018 at the latest. In September 2018, the Spanish Ministry of Defence decided on the Raytheon RIM-162 ESSM Block 2 for the ships primary self-defence system.The execution order of the project was given by the Council of Ministers on 29 March 2019.


== Navy specifications ==
According to statements by Frigate Captain Carlos Martínez-Merello, Head of the Resources and Media Definition Section of the General Staff of the Navy in 2010, during the Conference on Naval Programs in progress and future programs, that the new frigate must be adapted to the current scenarios in response to conventional and asymmetric threats such as patrol of a coastline or operations against pirates that do not require a large vessel.
According to the Navy, the new frigates must have an operative life of 40 years, be able to incorporate embarkable groups, as well as be able to operate with unmanned vehicles, both aerial, surface and under surface. Regarding the desired characteristics, the Navy requests a sustained speed of more than 35 knots. The F110 will have a multipurpose space for different mission profiles, 240 days of operation and 18 months of high availability.


== Navantia project ==
Navantia is working on the project called by the company as F2M2 and is already in operation a working group that together with members of the Navy will structure the ship's capabilities.The first design of the five presented was of trimaran type, but was rejected due to the noisy of its propulsion system, a great disadvantage since it is looking to develop an anti-submarine vessel and will be seven centimetres (2.8 in) shorter than the F100 but will have a greater sleeve, (30 m, 98 ft against 18.6 metres, 61 ft of the Alvaro de Bazáns). It will serve both to participate in humanitarian and war-like missions. The superstructure of the vessel will be integrated and is not yet defined if it will carry an AEGIS system with an AN / SPY-1 radar of versions D (V), carried by the Spanish frigate Cristóbal Colón or F (V) model carried by the Norwegian frigates of the Fridtjof Nansen class or of another type, although the company intends to install any type of product that future customers require. What is certain is that the SCOMBA system will be installed.To make it more difficult to locate by radar or thermal imaging will have some stealth capacity since in the superstructure masts or blocks of sensors will not be installed, will have a single gas escape zone that will be installed in the upper deck and the air intakes will be placed in line with the superstructure. The loading area shall be designed below the flight area with the installation of a downhill ramp on the starboard side and the possibility of using an output device similar to that used by the Danish logistical support vessels of the Absalon class.
The ship's hull will be of steel but the material of the superstructure is not yet defined although it is likely to be a composite material instead of aluminum.


== Units ==
There are five units of the class planned and have not been named yet.


== See also ==
Type 26, an equivalent British design
De Zeven Provinciën-class frigate, a Dutch class of comparable frigates
F125-class frigate, a German class of frigates
FREMM multipurpose frigate, French/Italian collaboration
Iver Huitfeldt-class frigate, of the Danish Navy has roughly the same tonnage
List of frigates


== References ==