Title: G-Star School of the Arts
Aspects: {'G star (disambiguation)'}

G-Star School of the Arts for Film, Animation and Performing Arts  is a public charter high school located in Palm Springs, Florida, founded by the school's CEO Greg Hauptner in 2003. G-Star is the largest film, animation, and acting, high school in the nation, and the only high school in the world that sits on the back lot of a major motion picture studio, the G-Star Studios. The school currently has 1,100 students in all three disciplines.
Students study in fields on film production, 3-D animation, and acting. Students that attend must take art classes as well as their normal academic classes. G-Star offers a complete college preparatory education with honors classes, Advanced Placement classes, and the International Baccalaureate World School Programme. The school also trains students in Writing, Directing, Producing, Acting and all aspects of film and TV production in front of the camera and behind the camera.


== Arts at the G-Star School ==
The school has over 110,000 sq. ft. under roof in its motion picture complex with 14 buildings housing 1,130 students on 12 acres of property.
Students produce well over 1,000 film shorts per year.  As a mid-year project, students produce a feature film which is then submitted to film festivals nationally and internationally. Done as a professional film with budgets and deadlines, the project involves every aspect of the school. Open auditions are held for every position, from directors, writers and actors to camera crew, grips and set designers.  In September 2018 G-Star Studios announced the new College of Cinematic Arts Keiser University opened utilizing the G-Star Studios and the Keiser University Flagship Campus in West Palm Beach, Florida.


== Notable productions ==
Students of the school assisted in the production of the music video for Radiohead's "House of Cards", which was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Short Form Video.  Students have also worked with Bob Dylan, Ron Jeremy, The Moody Blues, Celine Dion, Stevie Nicks, Rod Stewart, Jason Statham, NIKE, Rolex, EA Sports, and more.


== Red Apple Corporation Partnership ==
In July of 2019, G-Star School of the Arts began a partnership with Red Apple Corporation, the company that owns Charter Schools USA. The deal includes new facilities & management, therefor relieving Hauptner from his role of controlling funds and academics. 


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website