Title: Cambodian logsucker
Aspects: {'G. spinosa'}

The Cambodian logsucker (Garra cambodgiensis), also known as stonelapping minnow or false Siamese algae eater, is a species of ray-finned fish in the genus Garra. It is found in Southeast Asia.


== Description ==
The Cambodian logsucker has a broad midlateral stripe which has a width roughly equal to 2 scale rows, it has two black bands on the dorsal fin while the caudal fin may be plain or have dark margins. They are sexually dimorphic with the females having fuller, rounder bellies than the males, the males develop a red inside of the mouth during the spawning season and both sexes develop tubercules on the head and snout when breeding, although these are more obvious in the males. They grow to 15 cm standard length.


== Distribution ==
The Cambodian logsucker is found in the Mekong of Laos, Cambodia and Thailand, it also occurs in the Mae Klong, Chao Phraya and the river systems of south eastern Thailand in Phrae, Phitsanulok, Ubon Ratchathani, Trang, Chanthaburi, Chiang Mai, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Kanchanaburi, Nakhon Sawan, Yala, Chiang Rai and Surat Thani provinces of Thailand and in Peninsular Malaysia, it may also occur in south eastern Mymanmar.


== Habits and ecology ==
The Cambodian logsucker is found in rapidly flowing, small to medium sized streams with rocky beds, in submontane to hill regions,it may also occur in larger rivers, and even occasionally in lowland rivers. At the start of the monsoon they move into floodplains or paddy fields where they breed, the fry are cared for by the parents until they are juveniles at which point the fish return to the streams. It feeds on periphyton, phytoplankton and some insects. They are relatively sociable in the wild and can be found in loose shoals where the fish form a hierarchy, when there are disputes the fish charge each other, flare their fins, become paler in colour, and the  males extend their rostral processes.


== Human usage ==
The Cambodian logsucker is consumed locally by humans where it occurs and in some area sit is a popular food species when spawning. It is common in the aquarium trade but it has to be induced to breed using hormones in captivity.


== References ==