Title: Kommando Spezialkräfte
Aspects: {'G29'}

Kommando Spezialkräfte (Special Forces Command, KSK) is an elite special forces military command composed of special operations soldiers selected from the ranks of Germany's Bundeswehr and organized under the Rapid Forces Division. KSK has received many decorations and awards from NATO, the United States and its affiliates and KSK operatives are frequently requested for joint anti-terror operations, notably in the Balkans and Middle East.


== History ==
From 1973 until the KSK's formation in 1996, the West German (and later German) government assigned all counter-terrorist and special operations activities to the GSG 9, a highly trained police force created shortly after the hostage-taking that transpired during the 1972 Munich Olympic Games. Prior to 1973, the army's Fernspäher (Long-Distance Reconnaissance), the navy's Kampfschwimmer (Combat Swimmers/"Frogmen"), and (until 1989) the Special Weapons Escort Companies—Sonderwaffenbegleitkompanien were the only military units comparable to anything that other nations may have seen as dedicated special forces units. Following the KSK's activation on April 1, 1997, all but one of the Fernspähkompanie have been either disbanded or merged into the newly constituted unit.
Like those of all German military units, KSK deployments require authorization from the German Bundestag (Federal Assembly). The unit has engaged in numerous anti-terror campaigns both in Europe and abroad; known engagements include operations inside Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina and most recently in Afghanistan.
During the War in Afghanistan, although nominally under OEF command, the KSK worked under ISAF command since 2005, carrying out numerous operations in the vicinity of the German deployment in Kabul, including a successful raid on an al-Qaeda safehouse for suicide bombers in October 2006. KSK operators have commented in the German media about the restrictions placed on them by their national caveats and stated a preference for working directly for the Americans as part of OEF-A as they had done as part of Task Force K-Bar.As is to be expected with such units, specific operational details such as success and casualty rates are considered to be top secret and withheld even from the highest-ranking members of the Bundestag. This practice has elicited some serious concerns, resulting in agreement to increase both transparency and accountability, by disclosing mission details to selected members of the Bundestag, in relation to the future deployments of KSK forces.
On May 4, 2013 the KSK reported its first casualty. First Sergeant Daniel Wirth was fatally shot in Baghlan Province - Afghanistan during operation "Maiwand". US Army forces were part of the attempted rescue mission. Daniel Wirth was honored by his sister Kathrin Wirth-Torrente in a book titled "Brothers in Bravery". It not only tells her brother's story, but also reflects on 40 additional military members who lost their lives while fighting The Global War on Terror in the Greater Middle East. The book was published by the Travis Manion Foundation in September 2017.


== Commanders ==
There have been eight commanders in the 20-year period since KSK was formed in 1996. They are as follows:
1996–1998: Brigadier General Fred Schulz
1998–2000: Brigadier General Hans-Heinrich Dieter
2000–2003: Brigadier General Reinhard Günzel
2003–2005: Brigadier General Carl-Hubertus von Butler
2005–2007: Brigadier General Rainer Hartbrod
2007–2010: Brigadier General Hans-Christoph Ammon
2010–2013: Brigadier General Heinz Josef Feldmann
2013–2017: Brigadier General Dag Knut Baehr*
2017–2018: Brigadier General Alexander Sollfrank
2018–present: Brigadier General Markus Kreitmayr*Brigadier general Dag Baehr has previously served twice as a field officer in the KSK: First, under the command of Brigadier general Schulz, when it was founded from 1996 until 1999 and then again between 2004 until 2007 under the command of Brigadegeneral Hartbrod.


== Structure ==

The KSK is a regular army unit at brigade level and (apart from the HQ and the Development Group) divided into two battalion-sized departments: Operational Forces and Support Forces.


=== Organisation ===
Kommando Spezialkräfte
HQ KSK
Psychological Service
Language Service
Force Development Group
Operational Forces
1st Commando Company
2nd Commando Company
3rd Commando Company
4th Commando Company
Special Commando Company
Training and Development Centre
Support Forces
Staff & Supply Company
Signal Company
Support Company
Supply Platoon
Maintenance Platoon
Support Platoon
Medical Company


=== Operational Forces ===
Combat-ready units are divided into four Commando companies of approximately one hundred men. The Special Commando Company is normally staffed with veteran members, taking on various supporting roles. Each of the four Commando Companies has five specialized platoons, each with a unique specialty and ability that can be adapted to both the terrain and situation, depending on type action(s) required:

Command Platoon
1st Platoon: vehicle insertion
2nd Platoon: airborne insertion
3rd Platoon: amphibious operations
4th Platoon: operations in special geographic or meteorological surroundings (desert, jungle, mountain or arctic regions)
5th Platoon: reconnaissance, intelligence operations and sniper/counter-sniper operationsThere are four commando squads in every platoon. Each of these squads consists of four equally skilled members that have been hand-picked from the German Army into the platoon that best suits their abilities. Each squad member is specially trained as  a weapons expert, medic, combat engineer or communications expert, respectively. Additionally, some groups may contain other specialists, such as a heavy weapons or language expert.


=== Support Forces ===
The HQ & Support Company is responsible for supply duties in Germany. For that, the unit is made up of:

HQ Platoon
Material Platoon
Supply Echelon
Catering Section
Transport Platoon
Ammunition and Refueling PlatoonThe Signal Company consists of three signal platoons.
While the HQ & Support Company supports the KSK in Germany the Support Company takes supply duties during operations. Herefor, the company is organized in:

Repair Platoon
Supply Platoon
Parachute Equipment Platoon


== Selection and training ==

Initially, only officers and non-commissioned officers of the Bundeswehr could apply for service with the KSK and the subsequent evaluation period. As a prerequisite for entry, the Bundeswehr Commando Course (Einzelkämpferlehrgang) must have been completed by the applicant. Since 2005, however, applications have also been opened to civilians and enlisted personnel who must complete an 18-month Long Range Surveillance training cycle before the intense KSK selection process begins.
The selection process for the  combat positions is divided into two phases: a three-week-long physical and psychological training regimen (normally having a 40% pass rate), and later a three-month-long physical endurance phase (normally with an 8–10% pass rate). During latter phase, the KSK use the Black Forest as their proving grounds for prospective operators. In this time, candidates must undergo a grueling 90-hour cross-country run, followed by a three-week international Combat Survival Course at the German-led multinational Special Operations Training Center (formerly the International Long Range Reconnaissance School) in Pfullendorf.
Upon successful completion of the selection process, candidates may be allowed to start their 2–3-year training cycle with the KSK. This training includes roughly twenty courses at over seventeen schools worldwide: in Norway for Arctic terrain, Austria for mountainous terrain; El Paso, Texas, or Israel for desert and/or bush training; San Diego for amphibious operations; and Belize for jungle experience.
According to press releases from May 2008, the Bundeswehr aims to advance the attractiveness of service in the KSK to women. This is partially because the KSK was previously unable to reach its targeted number of troops. The KSK was no longer restricted to male troops after the Bundeswehr opened all units to women in 2001. As of 2018 in KSK, women occupied auxiliary positions.


== Insignia ==


=== Beret and badge ===
Members of the KSK wear maroon berets as a symbol of their roots in airborne units. A metal badge is worn which consists of a sword surrounded by oak leaves. The flag of the Federal Republic of Germany is depicted on the bottom of the sword.


=== Kommandoabzeichen ===
The Kommandoabzeichen (commando badge) is a cloth patch worn on the right pouch of the uniform. The commando badge's design is similar to the metal badge worn on the beret. It depicts a silver sword on light green background surrounded by oak leaves. The badge was permitted to be worn in 2000 by Federal President Johannes Rau.


=== Waffenfarbe ===
KSK units wear green as their Waffenfarbe, similar to infantry units. Before becoming an independent military force, the KSK was a part of infantry units.

		


== Controversy ==
In 2018, the German Federal Criminal Police Office uncovered a plot involving unknown KSK soldiers to murder prominent German politicians such as Claudia Roth, Heiko Maas and Joachim Gauck among others, and carry out attacks against immigrants living in Germany. Also, earlier that same year in a separate investigation, the State prosecutors in the city of Tübingen investigated whether neo-Nazi symbols were used at a "farewell" event involving members of KSK.


== References ==


== External links ==
KSK offalkräfte (KSK) at Sondereinheiten.de (in German)