Title: Brain Drain (album)
Aspects: {'I Believe in Miracles'}

Brain Drain is the eleventh studio album by the American punk rock band the Ramones, released on March 23, 1989. It is the last Ramones release to feature bassist/lyricist/vocalist Dee Dee Ramone, the first to feature Marky Ramone since his initial firing from the band after 1983's Subterranean Jungle and the band's last studio album on Sire Records.

It was tough recording the Brain Drain album because everyone took their shit out on me. I dreaded being around them. It drove me away — I didn't even end up playing on the album. Everybody in the band had problems; girlfriend problems, money problems, mental problems.Johnny Ramone expressed similarly unfavorable sentiments in his 2012 autobiography, Commando, calling it "one of my least favorite albums, but it has a couple of bright spots, like 'Miracles' and 'Punishment Fits the Crime.'" He awarded both the Brain Drain album and its follow-up, Mondo Bizarro, a "C" letter grade.
Dee Dee appears as the bassist in both of the music videos for "Pet Sematary" but was replaced by new bassist C.J. Ramone in the videos for "I Believe In Miracles" and "Merry Christmas (I Don't Want to Fight Tonight)."


== Songs ==
"Palisades Park" is a cover song, originally recorded by Freddy Cannon in 1962.
"Pet Sematary" was written for the Stephen King movie adaptation of the same name and was issued as a single, becoming one of the Ramones' biggest radio hits and a staple of their concerts during the 1990s."Merry Christmas (I Don't Want to Fight Tonight)" was later included in the film Christmas With The Kranks.


== Cover versions ==
"I Believe in Miracles" was covered by Eddie Vedder and Zeke for the We're a Happy Family—A Tribute to the Ramones album and is frequently covered by Pearl Jam at their shows.
"Pet Sematary" was performed live by German industrial metal band Rammstein (in conjunction with Clawfinger) and was released as a b-side to their single "Ich will" in 2001. The song was later covered by a psychobilly band, the Creepshow, as a bonus track for their second album, Run For Your Life, in 2008. It was also performed by the Plain White T's for the film Frankenweenie (Unleashed)'
"Merry Christmas (I Don't Want To Fight Tonight)" was covered by Joey Ramone on his second posthumous album ...Ya Know?


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
Ramones

Joey Ramone – lead vocals (tracks 1-3, 5-13)
Johnny Ramone – guitar
Dee Dee Ramone – bass guitar , backing vocals, lead vocals (track 4), synthesizer
Marky Ramone – drumsAdditional musicians

Jean Beauvoir – guitars (on "Merry Christmas (I Don’t Want To Fight Tonight)" and "Pet Sematary")
Artie Smith – additional guitars
Robert Musso – additional guitarsProduction

Jean Beauvoir – producer and arranger
Bill Laswell – producer
Daniel Rey – producer, musical coordinator
Gary "Muddbone" Cooper – production assistant
Mark Sidgwick – production assistant
Nicky Skopelitis – production assistant
Kim White – production assistant
Fernando Kral - engineer
Robert Musso – engineer, mixing
Martin Bisi – assistant engineer
Oz Fritz – assistant engineer
Judy Kirschner – assistant engineer
Robbie Norris – assistant engineer
Jason Corsaro – mixing
Howard Weinberg – mastering
George DuBose – artwork, coordination
Matt Mahurin – artwork


== Charts ==
Album - Billboard (North America)

Singles - Billboard (North America)


== References ==