Title: I Believe in Music (song)
Aspects: {'I Believe in Music'}

"I Believe in Music" is a 1970 song written and recorded by Mac Davis and later included on his second album I Believe in Music. Gallery covered it in 1972 as the second of three singles on their Nice to Be with You album as the follow-up release to their title track.
Gallery's version of the song reached No. 22 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and No. 13 on the US Cash Box Top 100. It also reached No. 5 in Canada.Mac Davis's original version had been released as a single nearly two years earlier and made a minor dent in the pop charts (US No. 117). His version also reached No. 25 on the Adult Contemporary chart. It later became his signature song and an anthem of the early '70s.


== Inspiration ==

In a 2017 interview, Davis said the song was inspired while he was in England at the home of Lulu and Maurice Gibb, who were married at that time:
I went to the kitchen and fixed myself a drink at the party, and there were a bunch of hippie types and they were gonna have a séance. They asked me if I would like to join them. And I said, "No man, I don’t think so." (laughs). It wasn’t my thing. Then someone asked, "Don’t you believe in the occult?" I said, "No man, I believe in music." And the second I said it, I just went … "I believe in music". I looked around … it was like a God-shot. I saw one of Maurice Gibb’s guitars sitting on a stand, and I picked it up and started strumming it. I had the hook before I left there … (he sings) "I believe in music, I believe in love". Years later, "I Believe In Music" became my signature song. I closed every show with it.

Davis said he kept and framed the piece of paper from the hotel room where he completed the song. According to Davis, the line "Lift your voices to the sky, God loves you when you sing" was inspired by a piece of folk art he had seen that said, "God respects you when you work, but He loves you when you sing".


== Chart performance ==

Mac Davis originalGallery cover


== Other cover versions ==
Helen Reddy's version was the first commercial recording of the song, and it was featured as the B-side of her first American hit, "I Don't Know How to Love Him," which became a hit in February of 1971.  "I Believe in Music" has also been covered by Marian Love (#111, 1971; AC #27), Donny Hathaway, B.J. Thomas, Liza Minnelli, Perry Como, Louis Jordan, Lee Towers, and Wayne Newton.


== References ==


== External links ==
Lyrics of this song at MetroLyrics
Listen to "I Believe In Music" on YouTube (Mac Davis)
Listen to "I Believe In Music" on YouTube (Gallery)