Title: Woman to Woman (Keyshia Cole album)
Aspects: {'I Choose You'}

Woman to Woman is the fifth studio album by American recording artist Keyshia Cole. It was released on November 19, 2012, by Geffen Records. The album was recorded between 2011 and 2012 and features guest vocals from Lil Wayne, Meek Mill, Ashanti, Elijah Blake and Robin Thicke.
Woman to Woman received generally positive reviews from music critics, who complimented Cole's vocal performances, with some critics calling it "angrily defiant" and "consistently good" and praised it as an "R&B almanac of shaky romance." Other critics found the album to be similar to that of Mary J. Blige. The album debuted at number ten on the US Billboard 200 chart, with first week sales of 96,000 copies.


== Background and concept ==
Cole started work on her fifth album in early 2011, after releasing her unsuccessful fourth album Calling All Hearts in December 2010. Woman to Woman is Cole's first album without mentor and A&R executive Ron Fair, following his departure from Geffen Records. Cole described the album as a "return to her roots" and a dedication to "her ladies". On a visit to BET's 106 and Park she told her fans, “I took myself out of the equation this time around and I focused on my fans, just make sure that they’re gonna be happy.”.
Despite touching on subjects similar to previous records, Cole was adamant that Woman to Woman would be different. On her official Twitter page she wrote, "I'm in love with these songs I've recorded. REAL TALK". Woman to Woman is named for the title track, a duet that Cole recorded with Ashanti. Cole appeared on BET's 106 & Park on August 1, 2012, to reveal that Woman to Woman would be arriving in Fall 2012 alongside Cole's new reality TV show Keyshia & Daniel: Family First.


=== New Management ===
On January 17, 2011, Cole tweeted "Would like for u guys to know that Manny Halley is no longer my management." followed by "Someone said if the people around u won't change, change the people around you." This happened shortly after the decline of opening week sales of Cole's album Calling All Hearts. She also disclosed that recent business disagreements played a part in their split. This was Cole's first album to be released without Halley, as he stayed with her from the beginning of her career. The two reconnected in 2013.


=== Production ===

Recording primarily took place at Geffen headquarters and Chalice Recording Studios in Los Angeles. Material was also recorded at Westlake Recording Studios. Other recording sessions took place in New York and Cleveland, Ohio, including Cole's home studio. In early 2011, Cole started production in early stages working with producers Boi-1da, Cool & Dre, Earl Powell and Toxic, along with Ester Dean. Cole also collaborated with Sak Pase. More producers for the album include Rodney Jerkins, T-Minus, DJ Camper, and Carlos McKinney. The album is produced by Cole, G Roberson, among others from Interscope Records.Cole worked with Elijah Blake, formerly known as Redd Stylez on the lead single, "Enough of No Love". Among those artists with featured vocals on are Ashanti, who appears on the title track "Woman to Woman", Meek Mill on "Zero", Elijah Blake on "Wonderland", Robin Thicke providing backing vocals on "Next Move", and Lil Wayne who appears on the album's first single "Enough of No Love". The song "I Choose You" was first recorded by Mary J. Blige and then by Jennifer Hudson, both of whom rejected the song.


== Titling and artwork ==
The album title, Woman to Woman, comes from Cole's decision to speak especially to females with this album. She is encouraging ladies who are in bad relationships, as she once was. On October 11, 2012, Keyshia posted the photos for the standard and deluxe editions. When asked about the album cover, Cole stated "It's literally me taking my face off. I have to for a second step outside of myself. The pain I've experience and the things I've been through, you don't forget."


== Release and promotion ==
Woman to Woman was first expected to be released in early fall. However, more recording and production pushed the release to November 19 comprising standard, deluxe, Target deluxe, and iTunes deluxe versions.
On October 9, 2012, the album's official Target promotional ad premiered during a commercial break for the series premiere of Keyshia & Daniel: Family First with an extended version premiering on November 13, 2012.


=== Singles ===
"Enough of No Love" is the album's lead single. It is a mid-tempo song featuring hip-hop artist Lil Wayne. It was sent to radio and released for digital download on July 3, 2012. The song was written by Redd Stylez and Cole and was produced by Harmony with a mid-tempo R&B production.  It peaked at number seven on the Billboard R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Chart. On August 9, 2012, the song debuted at number 94 on the Billboard Hot 100 where it ultimately peaked at number 84."Trust and Believe" is the album's second single. It is a heartfelt ballad written by R&B duo The Righterz and was produced by DJ Camper. "Trust and Believe" was released for digital download on October 22, 2012 and again on November 13, 2012. On October 24, it was ranked the number one added song to Urban radio of the week.Cole announced on her official Twitter account that "I Choose You" will be the album's third single. It was sent to urban radio on August 23, 2013. The music video for the song was filmed in August 2013. It was directed by Ethan Lader. The video displays a story of Cole in love with two men, but unable to let one go. Cole appeared on BET's 106 & Park on October 2, 2013 for the world premiere of the video. The video premiered on VEVO later that evening.


=== Live performances ===
On October 13, 2012, Cole performed "Trust and Believe" at the Black Girls Rock! Awards. The show aired on BET on November 4, 2012.
On November 17, 2012, Cole performed in Chicago at WGCI’s Big Jam 2012 alongside Usher, Rick Ross, Kelly Rowland, Fat Joe and Future. Cole performed "Enough of No Love" and "Trust and Believe". On November 20, 2012 Cole and Ashanti performed "Woman to Woman" at Best Buy Theater in New York City Cole performed "Enough of No Love" and "Trust and Believe" at the 2012 Soul Train Awards, which premiered on November 26, 2012. On March 18, 2013, Cole performed "Trust and Believe" on Jimmy Kimmel Live.


=== Tour ===

In an interview with the Los Angeles Times, Cole revealed that she was planning a tour called the Woman to Woman Tour for 2013. "I want to do a “Woman to Woman” tour. I want powerful singers, Brandy, possibly, Melanie Fiona, possibly. Just singers that can really blow but also have some things and records out right now." says Cole. "We’re working that out right now, so that could be a February–March." The Woman to Woman Tour started on March 28, 2013 at the NYCB Theatre at Westbury in Westbury, New York and ended on April 21, 2013 at the Fox Theater in Oakland, California visiting 18 North American venues, featuring Chrisette Michele and Mateo as supporting artists.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Woman to Woman received generally positive reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 78, which indicates "generally favorable reviews", based on five reviews. Ben Ratliff of The New York Times states, "Woman to Woman, Ms. Cole's fifth album, is an R&B almanac of shaky romance, nearly every song a first-person narrative with gnarled details, endlessly recombining data about suspicion, jealousy, pride, punishment, self-respect, the led-up, the aftermath."Mark Edward Nero of About.com rated the album 4.5 stars out of 5 labeling it as "angrily defiant" and "consistently good". Allmusic’s Andy Kellman gave the album 4 out of 5 starts stating "Although women are rarely addressed directly, Cole makes music for women dealing with a wide variety of emotionally painful romantic issues" while informing that this is "among her best work." Rick Florino of Artistdirect gave the album a rating of 4.5 out of 5 stars saying "Cole's got that timeless talent and presence that make for essential records, and that's exactly what 'Woman to Woman' is." Embrace You Magazine gave a rating of 4.8 out of 5 stars saying "‘‘Woman to Woman’’ reigns in maturity, depth, and solidity, and Keyshia’s voice is sounding more passionate than ever." R&B website ThisIsRnB.com gave a rating of 4 out of 5 stars stating "Back to her signature sound on emotional heavy ballads such as the new single, 'Trust and Believe', she is reminding fans why they fell in love with her back in 2005." Steve Jones of nationwide magazine USA Today rated the album 3 out of 4 stars calling Cole a "feisty soul singer" saying that it's "a conversation that women might actually have and that men might want to be aware of."


=== Commercial performance ===
The album debuted at number ten on the Billboard 200 selling 96,000 copies in its first week in the United States, becoming Cole's fifth consecutive top ten album. In its second week, the album fell to number fifteen, where it sold 37,100 copies. In its third week, the album fell eleven spots to number twenty-six, selling 28,600 copies.


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
Credits taken from the official album booklet.
Managerial

Performance credits

Instruments

Production


== Charts ==


== Release history ==


== References ==