Title: Ye (album)
Aspects: {'I Hate Music (disambiguation)'}

Ye (; stylized as ye) is the eighth studio album by American rapper and producer Kanye West. It was released on June 1, 2018, through GOOD Music and distributed by Def Jam Recordings. Following controversy surrounding an interview with TMZ, West re-recorded all the work on the album, completing it over the course of just two weeks at his ranch in Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Guest vocals from PartyNextDoor, Ty Dolla Sign, Kid Cudi, Jeremih and 070 Shake, among others, are included on Ye. West handled the production in its entirety, with additional production by Mike Dean, who serves as a co-executive producer, as well as Francis and the Lights, Benny Blanco, Irv Gotti, 7 Aurelius, Noah Goldstein, Che Pope, Caroline Shaw, Pi'erre Bourne and Ty Dolla Sign, among others. Succeeding the release of Pusha T's Daytona, the album is the second of five seven-track albums produced by West in what have been referred to as the "Wyoming Sessions", and set to be released weekly. It preceded the release of West's collaborative album with Kid Cudi, as Kids See Ghosts, titled Kids See Ghosts, Nas' Nasir, and Teyana Taylor's K.T.S.E.. 
"Yikes" and "All Mine" were released as singles in the summer of 2018 in support of Ye, with a lyric video being released for the latter simultaneously with one for non-single "Violent Crimes". Both of the singles attained top 20 positions on the US Billboard Hot 100. The album received generally positive reviews from music critics, with a number of them drawing comparisons to West's previous works, while some critics commented on the lyrical content. It was named as one of the best albums of 2018 by multiple publications, including Pitchfork and The Edge.
Ye became West's record-equalling eighth consecutive album to debut at number one on the US Billboard 200. It was also a chart-topper in Australia, Canada, Ireland and New Zealand, while reaching the top five in the Czech Republic, Denmark, Iceland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. The album has since been certified gold and silver by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and British Phonographic Industry (BPI), respectively.


== Background and recording ==
On February 24, 2016, West tweeted that his upcoming new album, titled Turbo Grafx 16, would be released during the summer, naming it after the video game console of the same name. West associate Ibn Jasper posted a photo on Instagram showing West and longtime collaborators Mike Dean, Plain Pat, and Kid Cudi in a recording studio working on West's new album. In March 2016, Quavo posted an image on his Instagram of him in a studio with West, with the words "TURBO GRAFX 16" written on the wall behind them. The other artists were present in the image, including Lil Yachty, Vic Mensa, Offset, Big Sean and Tyler, the Creator. The expected summer release of the album was not met, and West began his Saint Pablo Tour in August of that year. The tour ended abruptly, with 22 out of 41 dates being cancelled, after West, on his Sacramento stop, embarked on a rant lasting roughly 20 minutes, ending the show. West was admitted to UCLA Medical Center to undergo psychiatric observation after the incident.In May 2017, news began to surface that West was working on his new album "on top of a mountain in Wyoming" in seclusion. In March 2018, similar reports had emerged through various artists, including West himself, who was being spotted in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. The other artists were pictured or rumored, including Kid Cudi, Nas, King Louie, Pi'erre Bourne, ASAP Bari, Wheezy, The-Dream, Travis Scott and The World Famous Tony Williams. In April 2018, West met with Rick Rubin, who is the executive producer on West's previous two studio albums, Yeezus (2013) and The Life of Pablo (2016). West previewed the album for radio host Charlamagne tha God.In an interview conducted during the listening party for Ye, West stated that he "redid the whole album after TMZ," referring to a controversial interview with the tabloid news website, in which he made controversial comments about slavery, and suggested that the entire album was re-recorded in a month. Referencing the recording process, West claimed that initially: "Everything was going perfect. As soon as stuff stopped going so perfectly, I was like, 'I know what to do with this energy. I know exactly what to do with this.'" On June 4, 2018, West's wife Kim Kardashian reconfirmed this and revealed that two weeks were spent recording Ye. Of her presence in the studio, Kardashian said: "I left to go home for, like, two days and then I come back and it was a whole new album. It's fascinating to see the process."The following day, featured artist 070 Shake said in an interview that the album was still being worked on up until the day before it came out. She elaborated, revealing that West was "very calm" while completing recording sessions in a few hours. As well as 070 Shake, the album includes guest contributions from Ty Dolla Sign, Ant Clemons, Jeremih, Kid Cudi, Charlie Wilson, Caroline Shaw and Nicki Minaj. Though all of the other contributions are guest vocals, Nicki Minaj contributed a voicemail.


== Music and lyrics ==
Writing for Rolling Stone, Brendan Klinkenberg characterized Ye as a hip hop album, though viewed it as the opposite "of a laser-focused statement album." Lindsay Zoladz of The Ringer noted the album's rushed sound, describing it as what "has a slapdash, unfinished quality about it, like a 10-page paper written in a shaky hand on the bumpy morning bus ride to school." Similarly, Forbes's Bryan Rolli claimed that Ye "often felt like a collection of unfinished demos that lacked a musical or conceptual through-line," though branded it as "slapdash." For The Line of Best Fit, Ross Horton stated that the album "just sounds like it hasn't been finished," specifically noting the track "Wouldn't Leave" as sounding unfinished. Douglas Greenwood from NME wrote that Ye "lacks the profundity of My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy and the audacity of 808s or Yeezus," calling the album "succinct and easy to swallow."Steven Hyden compared the composition of the tracks on Ye to West's previous works in Uproxx, expressing the viewpoint that none of them stand out "as a decisive break with what he's done before." Paul Bowler from uDiscoverMusic viewed the work on the album as taking influence from West's previous tracks, describing it as what "marked a return to the dusty soul samples with which he had first made his name in the mid-00s." Similarly, Clayton Purdom of The A.V. Club claimed: "If you missed the old Kanye, well, he's here, bringing plump, stirring soul samples." He elaborated, writing that "if you missed the new Kanye, there's plenty of abrasive, Yeezus-style abstraction, too," and noted the inclusion of multitudes on Ye. Writing for The Observer, Kitty Empire viewed the work as "veering between sparse, hyper-modern styles and compositions which hark back to the soulful bent" of West's early career. Lucy Jones of The Daily Telegraph noted certain works as being reminiscent of West's third studio album Graduation (2007), viewing the piano chords and Slick Rick sample on the track "No Mistakes" as "old-school West," while also stating that certain vocals on "Ghost Town" continue the theme.The album includes references to West's mental health, with "Ghost Town" seeing him unravel his mind.


== Release and promotion ==
West announced the release date for his eighth solo album, June 1, via Twitter on April 19, 2018. Additional announcements included the release date of his collaborative album with Kid Cudi titled Kids See Ghosts to be released on June 8, a Teyana Taylor album to be released June 22, and Pusha T's album, Daytona, released on May 25. On April 22, West announced over Twitter a Nas album to be released June 15, and then clarified that all albums announced by him were to be produced by him.West promised on Twitter on April 27 to "drop a song with a verse that will bring Ebro the closure he's been seeking" in reference to Ebro Darden's criticism of his recent support for President Donald Trump. The song "Lift Yourself" starts with an instrumental for two minutes, heavily sampling "Liberty" by the group Amnesty. When West appears, he begins rapping nonsensical words, including "Poopy-di scoop / Scoop-diddy-whoop" and then the song abruptly ends shortly after. West premiered a song two hours after "Lift Yourself" titled "Ye vs. the People" featuring T.I. The song is structured like a back and forth conversation between T.I. and West, with T.I. playing the role of West's fans offended by his political views, with West replying to him by defending himself and his stance. During an interview with The Breakfast Club in May 2018, Pusha T claimed that a version of "Lift Yourself" with actual lyrics exists and hinted at it being released on the album. However, Ye was later released without the song included. It was also rumored for "Ye vs. the People" to be released on the album, though the song ultimately wasn't part of it.On April 28, 2018, West tweeted out a text conversation between him and Wes Lang. The text conversation included West showing the initial cover for the album, and an explanation of its concept, followed by him asking for help naming the album. Lang replied, "LOVE EVERYONE," to which West replied "I love that." The presented cover art showed plastic surgeon Jan Adams who performed a liposuction and mammoplasty operation on West's mother, Donda West, which led to complications and eventually her death a day after. Within the texts, West explained that he wanted to "forgive and stop hating," implying that West was ready to forgive the plastic surgeon for the situation regarding his mother's death. On April 30, Adams responded to the news of the cover in the form of an open letter, asking West to "cease and desist using my photo or any image of me to promote your album or any of your work," citing evidence from the official coroner's report on Donda West's death which shows negligence of Donda West's nurse in the aftercare being a factor in her death, that the actual surgery was performed properly, and adds that he is willing to sit down with West to have a face to face conversation. West responded to the letter on his Twitter saying, "This is amazing. Thank you so much for this connection brother. I can't wait to sit with you and start healing."West posted a video on Twitter on May 15 that featured possible working track listings of the upcoming albums he is working on, with the songs "Extacy" and "Wouldn't Leave" listed.Ye was released for digital download and streaming worldwide on June 1, 2018, through West's labels GOOD Music and Def Jam. The album was later released as a CD by the labels on July 20, 2018. On June 8, it was revealed that Ye was slated to be released on vinyl in the summer of 2018, with the vinyl release ultimately occurring in various countries on July 27, 2018 through West's labels. This marked the first official vinyl release for an album by West since his collaborative studio album Watch the Throne with Jay-Z in 2011. However, West's previous two albums Yeezus and The Life of Pablo were heavily bootlegged. A listening party took place for Ye on May 31, 2018 in Jackson, Wyoming, with West broadcasting a livestream of the listening party through the WAV app. The listening party invited a variety of guests, such as Chris Rock, Ty Dolla Sign, Kim Kardashian, Kid Cudi, Lil Yachty, Nas, Pusha T, Fabolous, Desiigner, 2 Chainz, Big Sean, Candace Owens, Cyhi The Prynce and others, and the album title was announced.


=== Promotional videos ===
There were never any music videos released for the album, but lyric videos for "All Mine" and "Violent Crimes" were released on June 18, 2018 to West's Vevo account. Both were themed with the album's cover art. There is also a 1:45 second promotional video of the album listening party that plays on West's website featuring the songs, "I Thought About Killing You" and "Ghost Town".


== Singles ==
West initially debuted Ye on June 1, 2018 without any singles, as is popular among musicians using the sudden release option that don't want a big marketing roll out. On June 8, "Yikes" was released to UK mainstream radio stations by West's labels as the lead single from the album. Four days later, it was revealed that West had to choose a lead single in the United States for promotion. Simultaneously, the song was revealed to have been selected by West for such a release to US radio stations. It was serviced to US rhythmic contemporary radio stations through West's labels as the lead single that same day. Prior to release as a single, the song charted at number 8 on the US Billboard Hot 100, standing as West's first solo track to enter the top ten of the Hot 100 since the single "Heartless" in 2008 and becoming his 16th top ten single on the chart. After having been released as a single, the song made its debut at number ten on the UK Singles Chart, standing as West's 19th top ten single on the chart. On August 14, 2019, "Yikes" was certified platinum in the US by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for sales of 1,000,000 units.West went on to select "All Mine" for release as the second single from Ye on July 20, 2018, which features vocals by Ty Dolla Sign and Ant Clemons. This decision was made by West due to his labels preparing a track for such a release to block a momentum loss for the album after "Yikes" experienced a lack of success on record charts. However, the track's lyric video had been released in promotion over a month before it was selected for release as a single. On July 24, 2018, the track was sent to US rhythmic contemporary radio stations through West's labels as the second single. The track entered at number 11 on the US Billboard Hot 100, prior to being released as a single. That same week, the track also debuted at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart. "All Mine" was certified platinum in the US by the RIAA for selling 1,000,000 units on September 21, 2018.Both of the singles stood as West's first entries in the top ten of the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart since "All Day" reached number six in 2015. "Yikes" and "All Mine" gave West his 25th and 26th charting tracks in the top ten of the chart, entering at numbers seven and nine, respectively. Though "Yikes" charted higher than "All Mine", the latter remained on the chart longer; it spend nine weeks on the US Billboard Hot 100, while the former only remained on the chart for five weeks.


== Artwork and title ==
 
The artwork for Ye was taken by West on his iPhone on his way to his album listening party on May 31, 2018, hours before the release of the album. It features a view of the Teton Range from Jackson Hole, the area where the album was recorded and produced, with the text reading "I hate being / Bi-Polar / its awesome"  [sic] scribbled on it in green. In an interview conducted with Big Boy during the listening party for the album, West explained the title, which is a diminutive of his own name commonly used in his songs, by stating: "I believe 'ye' is the most commonly used word in the Bible, and in the Bible it means 'you.' So I'm you, I'm us, it's us. It went from Kanye, which means 'the only one,' to just Ye – just being a reflection of our good, our bad, our confused, everything." However, West was incorrect in his belief of "ye" being the most commonly used word in the Bible.


== Critical reception ==
Ye was met with generally positive reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, the album received an average score of 64, based on 34 reviews. Aggregator AnyDecentMusic? gave Ye 6.1 out of 10, based on their assessment of the critical consensus.Alexis Petridis for The Guardian stated the album doesn't feel slight, but opined that it is exhausting. Petridis wrote: "Substantially more focused than its predecessor, it packs a lot into 23 minutes. It is bold, risky, infuriating, compelling and a little exhausting: a vivid reflection of its author." Jones looked at Ye as "an album about Kanye's state of mind, his family, and a narration of what's been going on in his 'shaky-ass year.' The beats are great. Lyrically, it's fine. Whatever you think of his politics, his songwriting, sample-hunting and beat-making remain dynamic, surprising and ballsy." Purdom claimed that West "can still create thunderous blasts of sound on par with anyone on the planet, and Ye's best moments are reminders of that. It's a prismatic album, reflecting its creator's entire body of work—and also whatever you think about him going in." Writing for Time, Maura Johnston compared West's previous projects to the album, saying that "the one thing they've consistently focused on is contrast: light and dark, ugly and beautiful, self-aggrandizing and self-loathing." She added that the album "resembles his last album, The Life of Pablo in which Ye doesn't deviate too much from the lyrical concepts of Pablo; it blends the trivial and the life-or-death, like on the darkened-club 'Yikes,' on which he declares his bipolar syndrome to be his 'superpower' and compares the U.S.-North Korea tensions to his long-simmering beef with Wiz Khalifa."Neil Z. Yeung of AllMusic stated that Ye was boring, writing the album "can feel uneven, sometimes boring, and more indulgent than usual, but it's a fascinating peek into West's psyche." Kyle Mullin from Exclaim! wrote that "if West had better delved into his emotional and psychological turmoil in Ye's lyrics, instead of getting bogged down with click-baity asides, then this LP would've been a classic." For Billboard, Eric Brown stated: "It's tough to ignore Ye's musical stasis; known for his forward motion, on this set, West remains mired in the past," also commenting that "It's a missed opportunity in the sense that it fails to measure up to his previous work and change the conversation around him." Similarly, Wren Graves of Consequence of Sound believed that "on Ye, he's consolidating old skills, not testing out new ones," adding that "the lack of wow-factor, combined with the short length, makes the album feel somewhat slight." Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone described the album as "wildly uneven" with "enough sporadic flashes of brilliance to make you hungry for much, much more." Meaghan Garvey of Pitchfork wrote that "the problem with Ye is not that it was made by an unrepentant asshole, but that it is thoroughly, exhaustingly boring—a word I never imagined would apply to a generation's most reliable innovator."Slant Magazine's Zachary Hoskins viewed the album as what "just feels unfinished, as if he wanted to avoid another debacle like the rollout of the also-unfinished The Life of Pablo" and called it "a mix of the weakest moments from The Life of Pablo." Horton criticized the album, claiming that "there's no through-line. No concept. No consistency. There's certainly no quality control." Robert Christgau gave the album one-star in a capsule-review column for Vice, calling it a "half-assed attempt to make asshattery germane again."


=== Accolades ===
Ye appeared on year-end best album lists for 2018 by multiple publications. On the Pitchfork Readers' Poll: Top 50 Albums of 2018, the album was voted in at number 37. Ye was listed at number four on the website's polls for most underrated and most overrated album of the year, respectively. The Edge and Jon Caramanica of The New York Times both listed the album as the seventh best of 2018. Ye was ranked by NME as the 34th best album of the year, with the staff writing that "there's plenty in this experimental, weird little album that suggests Kanye has very much still got it." 411Mania named Ye the 42nd best album of 2018, with David Hayter of the website claiming that despite the "serious faults" of the album, it is an "endlessly listenable collection," calling the music "too coherent and sonically satisfying to quibble over." Ye was ranked as the 30th best hip hop album of the year by Rolling Stone even though the staff viewed it as West's worst album, writing that "Kanye West, at his worst, is still making more fascinating music than almost anyone else," and the staff elaborated, calling the album "a dense and, at times, brilliant piece of music."On April 25, 2018, West tweeted out: "I'm turn the Grammys into the Yammys," predicting success for himself at the 2019 Grammy Awards. West's work on Ye and other projects earned him a nomination for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical at the ceremony. However, the album marked West's first to not be nominated for Best Rap Album at the Grammys, with the lack of a nomination being viewed as a snub by multiple publications. In an article for Consequence of Sound, Lake Schatz was surprised by West being snubbed even though he called Ye "hardly the best in his catalog" and questioned "whether the lack of even a nomination has to do partially with the MC's especially divisive nature in 2018." At the 2019 Fonogram Hungarian Music Awards, the album earned a nomination for Best Foreign Rap or Hip-Hop Album of the Year.


== Commercial performance ==
Ye debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 with 208,000 album-equivalent units, of which 85,000 were pure album sales, giving it the fifth-largest weekly sales of an album for 2018 at the time in terms of units, and simultaneously entered atop the US Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. The album was West's eighth chart topper on the Billboard 200, all of which reached the position consecutively, helping him tie Eminem's still active-streak from 2000–2018 and English band the Beatles streak from 1965-1968 as one of only three acts to accumulate eight consecutive number one albums. West also became the only other act apart from Eminem to achieve eight consecutive number one debuts, since none of the albums from the Beatles' streak debuted atop the Billboard 200, while tying Eminem for the second position of most number one albums among rappers. The sales surpassed the first week projections of 175,000 to 190,000 album-equivalent units and up to 80,000 pure sales. Ye recorded the second largest per-track streaming average ever, receiving 25.7 million on-demand audio streams. The seventh-largest streaming debut week ever was experienced with 120,000 streaming equivalent albums, with the streams being counted at over 180 million.The album descended four places to number five in its second week and dropped 65% in sales, moving 74,000 album-equivalent units. This became the second highest decrease in sales for an album's second week of 2018, standing behind the 73% decline of American musician J. Cole's fifth studio album KOD; however, the second week sales for KOD were higher than those of Ye, with the album pushing 105,000 units. The following week, Ye dropped six places to number 11, selling 36,841 album-equivalent units mostly due to streaming, and around 6,400 came from paid downloads. In its fourth week on the Billboard 200, the album moved 25,900 units and further descended three places to number 14. On September 21, 2018, Ye was certified gold in the US by the RIAA for selling 500,000 album-equivalent units. In 2018, the album was ranked as the 50th and 30th most popular album of the year on the Billboard 200 and Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums charts respectively. The pure album sales for the end of the year were 156,000.Ye debuted atop the ARIA Albums chart, giving West his second chart-topping album in Australia and replacing fellow rapper Post Malone's second studio album Beerbongs & Bentleys at the top position. This made West the third major hip hop act to have an album reach the top ten of the chart in 2018, joining J. Cole with KOD and fellow rapper ASAP Rocky with his third studio album Testing. A Streaming Equivalent Album Value being taken into account for the Album Chart calculations in Australia helped Ye top the ARIA Albums chart, since the value counts the streams for all tracks of albums ten tracks or less, rather than the two most streamed tracks as done for longer albums. The album was also a chart topper on the Irish Albums Chart, giving West his first number one album in Ireland. By reaching the same position on the New Zealand Albums chart, Ye became West's second number one album in the country. The album also debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart, standing as West's sixth chart-topping album in Canada.Ye entered at number two on the UK Albums Chart, being held off the top spot by The Greatest Showman: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack. The soundtrack album denied West a number one album on his own birthday and prevented him from topping the chart for the third time in his career. However, Ye was the most played album of the week on streaming services, and it was reported that 80% of sales came from streams. On January 4, 2019, the album was certified silver in the United Kingdom by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for sales of 60,000 units. Ye also attained the chart position of number two on the Danish Albums Chart and Norwegian Albums Chart. Similarly, the album reached number three on the Czech Albums, Icelandic Albums, and Netherlands' Dutch Album Top 100 charts. On the Swedish Albums chart, Ye reached number five.All seven tracks debuted in the top 40 of the US Billboard Hot 100, helping place West joint-tenth on the list for most top 40 entries on the Hot 100, as well as the eleventh act with as many as seven simultaneous top 40 Hot 100 entries. Also, all seven tracks debuted in the ARIA Australian Top 50 Singles Chart. As well as this, the two tracks "Ghost Town" and "All Mine" charted in the top 40 of the UK Singles Chart, along with lead single "Yikes"; the song was the highest charting from the album.


== Track listing ==
Credits adapted from Tidal and Qobuz.
Notes

^[a]  signifies a co-producer
^[b]  signifies an additional producer
"All Mine" features vocals by Ty Dolla Sign and Ant Clemons
"Wouldn't Leave" features vocals by Ty Dolla Sign, PartyNextDoor and Jeremih
"No Mistakes" features vocals by Kid Cudi, Charlie Wilson and Caroline Shaw
"Ghost Town" features vocals by PartyNextDoor, Kid Cudi and 070 Shake
"Violent Crimes" features vocals by 070 Shake and Ty Dolla Sign, and a voicemail by Nicki MinajSample credits

The original version of "I Thought About Killing You" contains an uncredited sample from "Fr3sh", as performed by Kareem Lotfy.
"Yikes" contains a sample from "Kothbiro", as performed by Black Savage.
"Wouldn't Leave" contains a sample from "Baptizing Scene", as performed by Reverend W.A. Donaldson.
"No Mistakes" contains a sample from "Children (Get Together)", as performed by Edwin Hawkins Singers; and "Hey Young World", as performed by Slick Rick.
"Ghost Town" contain a sample from "Take Me for a Little While", as performed by The Royal Jesters; and "Someday", as performed by Shirley Ann Lee.


== Personnel ==
Credits adapted from Tidal.
Mike Dean – engineering, mixing
Mike Malchicoff – engineering
Zack Djurich – engineering
Andrew Dawson – engineering (tracks 2, 7), programming (tracks 2, 7)
William J. Sullivan – engineering (track 5)
Noah Goldstein – recording engineering (tracks 2, 4), engineering (track 6)
Mauricio Iragorri – recording engineering (track 6)
Sean Solymar – assistant recording engineering (tracks 1–5)
Jess Jackson – mixing
Mike Snell – assistant remix engineering (track 7)


== Charts ==


== Certifications ==


== Release history ==


== See also ==
2018 in hip hop music
GOOD Fridays
List of number-one albums of 2018 (Australia)
List of number-one albums of 2018 (Canada)
List of number-one albums of 2018 (Ireland)
List of UK top-ten albums in 2018
List of UK R&B Albums Chart number ones of 2018
List of Billboard 200 number-one albums of 2018
List of Billboard number-one R&B/hip-hop albums of 2018
List of number-one albums from the 2010s (New Zealand)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Ye at Discogs (list of releases)