Title: I Kissed a Girl (film)
Aspects: {'I Kissed a Girl (disambiguation)'}

I Kissed a Girl (French: Toute première fois)  is a 2015 French comedy film directed by Noémie Saglio and Maxime Govare. The film's original title "Toute première fois" (English: Very first time) refers to a gay man's first time having sex with a woman and is the story of a gay man who is engaged, but considers leaving his boyfriend after beginning an affair with a woman.


== Plot ==
Jérémie (Pio Marmaï), a Parisian gay man, unexpectedly finds himself waking up in bed in an apartment he doesn't know, next to a woman he's never met. To his surprise, he discovers that he has had a drunken one-night stand with a beautiful Swedish woman (Adrianna Gradziel) named Adna. This is the first time with a woman for Jérémie, who is happily engaged to his future husband Antoine (Lannick Gautry). What follows in the story of Jérémie's "coming in", as the now sexually confused gay man begins to question his sexuality as he falls in love with a woman for the first time. Jérémie's burgeoning romance with Adna threatens to foil the upcoming nuptials as Antoine becomes increasingly suspicious. Jérémie is faced with the choice of staying gay and getting married or going straight and upending his life. He confesses the affair to his heterosexual male friend Charles (Franck Gastambide), who suggests that Jérémie may be bisexual and encourages him to continue the relationship. Following Charles' advice, Jérémie continues his affair with Adna to see if his attraction to her is genuine. As the wedding day approaches and his relationship of 10 years begins to fray, Jérémie is forced to confess his infidelity to Antoine. He leaves Antoine to be with Adna. With both his gay relationship over and his homosexuality ended, Jérémie decides to come out of the closet to reveal his heterosexuality to the world.


== Cast ==
Pio Marmaï as Jérémie Deprez
Franck Gastambide as Charles
Adrianna Gradziel as Adna
Lannick Gautry as Antoine
Camille Cottin as Clémence
Frédéric Pierrot as Hubert Deprez
Isabelle Candelier as Françoise Deprez
Sébastien Castro as Nounours
Nicole Ferroni as Sarah Deprez
Étienne Guiraud as Jean


== References ==


== External links ==
I Kissed a Girl on IMDb