Title: I Like It (Cardi B, Bad Bunny and J Balvin song)
Aspects: {'I Like It'}

"I Like It" is a song recorded by American rapper Cardi B with Puerto Rican rapper Bad Bunny and Colombian singer J Balvin for her debut studio album Invasion of Privacy (2018). It was released on May 25, 2018 to radio stations through Atlantic Records as the fourth single from the album. "I Like It" is a Latin trap song that comprises a trap beat and salsa music. It was written by the three performers along with Jordan Thorpe and Klenord Raphael, while the production was handled by J. White Did It, Tainy, Craig Kallman and Invincible. The song contains a sample from "I Like It Like That", with Tony Pabón, Manny Rodriguez, and Benny Bonnilla being credited as co-writers.Work on the song took from October 2017 to early April 2018. Its music video was filmed in Little Havana, Miami. The single topped the US Billboard Hot 100, becoming Cardi B's second number one, the most for a female rapper in the chart's history, and the first for both Bad Bunny and J Balvin. It also reached the top 10 in Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Billboard staff, Los Angeles Times, and Apple Music's editorial selection ranked it as the best song of the year. The single was nominated for Record of the Year at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards.


== Background ==

During the recording sessions of Invasion of Privacy, Cardi and her team were listening to beats and song ideas. Craig Kallman wanted to include a track that pays homage to her Latin heritage and searched among his Latin music collection of records that he used to play when he was a DJ. Decided for Pete Rodriguez's "I Like It Like That" and "Oh That's Nice", he added J White to the production process. The sample of the former song "over a very rough instrumental" and with a Cardi verse on it was sent to musician Edgar Machuca. White and Machuca worked on the production, chopping up the sample and trying to "make the song sound better and cohesive and beef up the production." Cardi re-wrote the hook a number of times and cut vocals, eventually choosing the chorus she was most comfortable with. The three producers looped the "I Like It" part as they felt that was the catchiest part of the sample. Machucha proposed to add Bad Bunny and J Balvin to the track, with both artists contributing with their verses and ideas. Tainy and Invicible finished working on the production focusing on the instrumentals. Work on the record started in October 2017, and finished in early April 2018.


== Production ==
"I Like It" is a Latin trap song. It is a blend of trap and salsa, and samples 1960s boogaloo song "I Like It Like That". As noted by a Billboard editor, the song is "heavily indebted to the world of Latin hip hop." Bad Bunny raps in English and Spanish, while J Balvin performs in Spanish.


== Critical reception ==
"I Like It" received positive reviews from critics. Writing for Rolling Stone, Brittany Spanos deemed it "the song of the summer" and commented "[it] sounds like it was chemically concocted in a mad scientist's lab to be 2018's reigning song of the summer. [...] Everything about this song is perfect for summer: the trap-meets-salsa beat, features from two of reggaeton's biggest stars, a sample of Pete Rodriguez's half-century-old boogaloo hit "I Like It Like That."" In The Atlantic, Hannah Giorgis also deemed it "song of the summer" considering "[the song] is irresistible because it channels the rapper at her best: when she feels at home." She also noted that the verses from both Bad Bunny and J. Balvin "match Cardi's energy" and "add complementary dynamism to the track." Neil Z. Yeung of AllMusic considered it a "notable highlight" of the album.Billboard staff and Los Angeles Times listed it as the best song of 2018. Apple Music's editorial selections also ranked it as 2018's Song of the Year. Entertainment Weekly considered it the fifth best song of the year, writing "[the song] will be on summer rotation long past 2018." Rolling Stone listed it as the third-best song, NPR as the eighth best, and The Guardian as the ninth best. In The New York Times, Jon Pareles considered it the tenth best of the year, and Jon Caramanica listed it at number one along with three other Bad Bunny songs. Consequence of Sound considered it the fourth-best of the year.


== Commercial performance ==
Prior to its release as a single, the song debuted at number eight on the US Billboard Hot 100, becoming Cardi B's fifth top-ten entry on the chart and the highest debut of the songs from the album, which all debuted on the Hot 100 during the album's first week of release. Bad Bunny and J Balvin earned their first and second top 10s, respectively. Following the release of the single's accompanying music video, the song rose to a new peak of number seven on the chart, For the chart issue dated June 16, with "I Like It" and "Girls Like You," her collaboration with Maroon 5 charting at number four, Cardi B scored two concurrent Hot 100 top-five singles for the second time in 2018. It ascended to number two the next week, blocked from the top by XXXTentacion's "Sad!". It reached number one in its twelfth week, earning Cardi her second chart-topper, thus making her the first female rapper in history to do so. Bad Bunny and J Balvin scored their first number one. She also became the first female soloist to reach number one with two songs from a debut album since Lady Gaga, who did it in 2009. "I Like It" reached number one on Digital Songs in its 20th chart week, claiming the sixth-longest wait to the summit since the chart began in 2004. It also became Cardi B's second number one song on the Radio Songs chart. Internationally, the single also charted within the top 10 in Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. In the United States, I Like It reigned in the charts for 51 weeks, which made Cardi B the first female rapper to have a song chart that long.
Commenting on the single topping the Hot 100, editor Leila Cobo for Billboard explained its notability, "it's part of an accelerated spike of Spanish and Spanish-infused songs on the chart [...] This surge can be attributed at least in part to streaming, which has broadened the scope for Latin music that is still shunned from major mainstream outlets. But it also reflects the times, the moment and the new openness of the world, despite the entrenchment at the border.""I Like It" also became the first number one single—and the first Latin trap song in this genre to do so—on the Billboard Dance/Mix Show Airplay chart for Cardi B, Bad Bunny, and J Balvin, reaching that summit in its September 1, 2018 issue, benefitting from the support from both the 80 reporting stations (dual Top 40/CHR and Rhythmic outlets who submit their mix show hours or incorporate it in their playlist) and the core full-time Dance/EDM stations, the latter utilizing the remixed Dance versions of the song."I Like It" was the sixth most streamed song of 2018 in Apple Music globally. It was also the sixth most streamed in Canada.


== Music video ==

The song's accompanying music video was directed by Eif Rivera and filmed in March 2018 in Little Havana, Miami. A preview of the clip was featured on YouTube Music's announcement video on May 23. Released on May 29, 2018, the music video opens with Cardi B in a neighborhood, followed by scenes of Bad Bunny in the streets and J Balvin in a club. It also features scenes of the trio performing together.Director Eif Rivera stated in an interview that he was inspired by the movie I Like It Like That (1994), which opening scene centered in a neighborhood of the South Bronx."I Like It" topped YouTube's 2018 Songs of the Summer list in the United States, and ranked fifth globally. As of August 2019, it has received over a billion views.


== Live performances ==
Cardi B, Bad Bunny and J Balvin gave the first live performance of "I Like It" at the 2018 Coachella Music Festival during its second weekend, on April 22. The trio delivered the first televised performance of the song at the 2018 American Music Awards. Featuring colorful outfits and visuals, they were accompanied by a live band composed by trumpet and bongo players. Cardi started the performance by lying atop a rotating circular stage; she then ripped off the voluminous tulle and performed a salsa dance. Bad Bunny was wheeled in for his verse in a grocery cart, while J Balvin joined hanging by the DJ booth. The Billboard article reviewing the ceremony named it the best performance of the night.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Track listing ==
Digital download – Dillon Francis remix"I Like It" (Dillon Francis remix) – 3:39Digital download – German remix"I Like It" (featuring Kontra K and AK Ausserkontrolle) – 4:1412-inch single"I Like It" – 4:13
"I Like It" (instrumental) – 4:13
"I Like It" (Dillon Francis remix) – 3:39
"I Like It" (radio edit) – 4:11


== Credits and personnel ==
Credits adapted from Tidal.


== Charts ==


== Certifications ==


== Release history ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Audio on YouTube
AMAs performance on YouTube