Title: I Love the '70s: Volume 2
Aspects: {"I Love the '70s"}

I Love the '70s: Volume 2 is a television mini-series in the I Love the... series presented by VH1. The sequel to I Love the '70s, it originally aired on VH1 from July 10, 2006 to July 14, 2006.


== Recurring segments ==
Bruce Lee and Evel Knievel in Stunt Fu: A cut-out of Bruce Lee and a cut-out of Evel Knievel on a motorcycle are edited into short video clips from the year in question. Bruce Lee generally kicks someone who falls over, and Evel Knievel jumps his motorcycle over someone in each video clip.
Charo TV: Charo, who was a frequent television guest star in the 1970s, presents ideas of how she could have been introduced into the cast of a popular show from the time period. Each idea includes some reference to her "cuchi cuchi" catchphrase.
Porn or Not Porn: John Waters features a segment in which he poses a small test to see whether or not three films, selected based on their suggestive titles, are either considered pornographic or not pornographic. He ends the segment by stating he found a vintage copy of a parodic pornographic film.
It's Time for Burt Reynolds' Mustache: The segment shows a picture of Burt Reynolds from the relevant year, illustrating how his mustache changed over time (or 1972 was gone from his face), and is introduced by several voices annoyingly chanting the segment's title and is followed by the same voices chanting "That was Burt Reynolds' mustache."
Songs to Make Whoopee To: Bob Eubanks (The Newlywed Game) presents the love songs from each year. Some of the song titles are fake, and merely read aloud; whenever he reads the title of an actual song, a clip of the song is played. The segment takes the form of an advertisement for an album, also available on 8-track and cassette.
Then and Now: Alison Arngrim (Little House on the Prairie) presents the segment for each year in which pop culture personalities from the decade are shown in pictures from the 1970s and today, a difference of thirty years which she emphasizes.
Look Who's Got a Farrah Do: The segment takes a look at each year to see what celebrity had a hairdo similar to that of Charlie's Angels star Farrah Fawcett.
Guitar Gods: Peter Frampton presents the guitar players of each year.
Survivors: Gloria Gaynor ("I Will Survive") presents the survivors of each year. Each segment begins by Gaynor citing three trends she survived that year.
What Dom Cooked For...: The segment has actor Dom DeLuise telling viewers what food he would make for an actor, or some actors, and the name of the food would be based on a film, TV program, etc. from the episode's year.
That's No Jive Turkey: The segment takes place near the end of an episode and would let a certain celebrity give one last opinion on a topic that was covered in the episode.
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Christopher Knight (The Brady Bunch) has a rant for each year over how he does not wish to be known as Peter Brady anymore. Each year features Knight drawing a contrast between a member of the show's cast and the character that actor portrayed.
Guess This Joe: At the conclusion of each episode, there's a small puzzle being put together of a famous person named Joe, with the viewer's job being to "Guess this Joe" before the puzzle is finished and the identity is revealed. Some segments involve a celebrity with a related name, such as "Joey," "José" or "Joseph." The lyrics to the "Guess this Joe" song are: "If you guess this Joe, it's a Joe you know, if you don't know this Joe, then it's a Joe you don't know, so if you guess this Joe, it's a Joe you know, guess this Joe, hey, guess this Joe..."
During the credits of every episode, a performance of a popular song from that decade was played with no commentary. These were usually replaced with a show promo by VH1.


== Topics covered by year ==


=== 1970 ===
Hawaii Five-O
AMC Gremlin
Norman Greenbaum's "Spirit in the Sky"
Willis Reed and the 1970 NBA Finals
Adam-12 
Miniskirts
Freda Payne's "Band of Gold"
Patton
Airport
Three Dog Night
First floppy disk
Jimi Hendrix's music and death
Woodstock: The Movie
Casey Kasem's American Top 40
Sly and the Family Stone
Hippie fashions
Beneath the Planet of the ApesCharo TV 1970: Charo's Heroes
Porn or Not Porn 1970: Sex and the Single Vampire (porn), Two Mules for Sister Sara (not porn), and A Man Called Horse (not porn)
Then and Now 1970: Michael Nesmith, Michael Jackson, and Mike Lookinland
Guitar Gods of 1970: Duane Allman (The Allman Brothers Band), Terry Kath (Chicago), and Jimi Hendrix
Survivors of 1970: Ali MacGraw, Jane Fonda, and Alice Nelson
What Dom Cooked for Hawkeye and Trapper John: Garlic M*A*S*H Potatoes 
That's No Jive, Turkey: Rachael Harris on AMC Gremlin
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Christopher Knight (real) and Peter Brady (fake)
Guess This Joe: Joe Torre


=== 1971 ===
The Hollywood Squares
The French Connection
Carole King's Tapestry
The Rolling Stones' Sticky Fingers
Billy Jack
Sears Toughskins
View-Master
The Dick Cavett Show
Grateful Dead
K-Tel
Malibu Barbie
The Flip Wilson Show
Jethro Tull
Supercomb
Gordon Lightfoot's "If You Could Read My Mind"
Brian's SongCharo TV 1971: Charo in the Family
Porn or Not Porn 1971: Shaft (not porn), Bedknobs and Broomsticks (not porn), and Below the Belt (porn)
Then and Now 1971: Cybill Shepherd, Cat Stevens, and Sean Connery
Guitar Gods of 1971: Pete Townshend (The Who), Jerry Garcia (Grateful Dead), and Jimmy Page (Led Zeppelin)
Survivors of 1971: Rhoda Morgenstern, Sally Struthers, and Cher
What Dom Cooked for Alex the Droog: A Clockwork Orange Julius
That's No Jive, Turkey: Modern Humorist on Grateful Dead
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Barry Williams (real) and Greg Brady (fake) 
Guess This Joe: Joe Jackson


=== 1972 ===
Superfly
The Paul Lynde Show
Carly Simon and James Taylor
1972 Nixon visit to China/Ling-Ling and Hsing-Hsing
Pink Flamingos
Alice Cooper
Maude
Nerf footballs
Miami Dolphins' perfect season
Goodyear blimp
Billy Dee Williams
Gary Glitter
The Bob Newhart Show
Richard Pryor
Bobby Fischer
Man of La ManchaCharo TV 1972: Charo Five-O
Porn or Not Porn 1972: Black Mama White Mama (not porn), Flesh of the Lotus (porn), and The Hot Rock (not porn)
Then and Now 1972: Sally Struthers & Rob Reiner, Burt Reynolds, and David Cassidy
Guitar Gods of 1972: Neil Young, Steve Howe (Yes), and Mick Ronson (Ziggy Stardust)
Survivors of 1972: Bette Midler, Shirley Chisholm, and Carly Simon
What Dom Cooked for Liza: Liza Minnelli Linguine with a Glass of Cabaret
That's No Jive, Turkey: Tom Papa on The Paul Lynde Show
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Mike Lookinland (real) and Bobby Brady (fake)
Guess This Joe: G.I. Joe


=== 1973 ===
Match Game
Jesus Christ Superstar
Homosexuality no longer considered a mental disorder
Cher's "Half-Breed"
Westworld
Vicki Lawrence's "The Night the Lights Went Out in Georgia"
Charlie perfume
Steve McQueen
Marvin Gaye's "Let's Get It On"
The Streets of San Francisco 
Elvis: Aloha From Hawaii
Celebrity Bowling 
Secretariat
Deep Purple's "Smoke on the Water"
Paper Moon
American GraffitiCharo TV 1973: The Charo Tyler Moore Show
Porn or Not Porn 1973: Bang the Drum Slowly (not porn), The Last of Sheila (not porn), and Ride a Cocked Horse (porn)
Then and Now 1973: Cheech Marin, Cher, and Roger Daltrey
Guitar Gods of 1973: David Gilmour (Pink Floyd), Allen Collins & Gary Rossington (Lynyrd Skynyrd), and Ritchie Blackmore (Deep Purple)
Survivors of 1973: Barbra Streisand, Tatum O'Neal, and Jane Seymour
What Dom Cooked for Babs and Robert: The Way We Waffles
That's No Jive, Turkey: Patrice O'Neal on Love Music 
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Robert Reed (real) and Mike Brady (fake)
Guess This Joe: Joe Paterno


=== 1974 ===
The Mary Tyler Moore Show
The Street Fighter (Japan)
Electric Light Orchestra
String bikini
Password
Hank Aaron
Mikhail Baryshnikov's defection to Canada
Chico and the Man
Harlem Globetrotters
Burt Reynolds
Barry White's "Can't Get Enough of Your Love, Babe"
Bedazzler
Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore
Gladys Knight & the Pips' "Midnight Train to Georgia"
Sit n' Spin
Heimlich maneuver
EarthquakeCharo TV 1974: Little Charo on the Prairie
Porn or Not Porn 1974: Blazing Zippers (porn), The Golden Voyage of Sinbad (not porn), and Fulfillment (porn)
Then and Now 1974: James Taylor, Melissa Gilbert, and Bob Barker
Guitar Gods of 1974: Alex Lifeson (Rush), Mick Ralphs (Bad Company), and Eric Clapton
Survivors of 1974: Diane Keaton, Laura Ingalls Wilder, and Florida Evans
What Dom Cooked for Michael and Fredo: Fettuccini Al-Fredo Corleone
That's No Jive, Turkey: Greg Fitzsimmons on String bikini
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Susan Olsen (real) and Cindy Brady (fake)
Guess This Joe: Joe DiMaggio


=== 1975 ===
S.W.A.T.
Dog Day Afternoon
Skateboard craze
Van McCoy's The Hustle and the dance craze
The Rocky Horror Picture Show
Labelle's "Lady Marmalade"
1975 World Series
Rollerball
Disappearance of Jimmy Hoffa
Bruce Springsteen's "Thunder Road"
AMC Pacer
Joe Namath appears in a Beautymist pantyhose commercial
Shampoo
Nair
The Swiss Family Robinson
Joe Cocker's "You Are So Beautiful"
The Return of the Pink PantherCharo TV 1975: The Charo Family Robinson
Porn or Not Porn 1975: Let's Do It Again (not porn), The Shootist (not porn), and The Analist (porn)
Then and Now 1975: Aretha Franklin, Mackenzie Phillips, and Ron Palillo
Guitar Gods of 1975: Billy Gibbons (ZZ Top), Joe Perry (Aerosmith), and Jeff Beck
Survivors of 1975: Martina Navratilova, Loretta Lynn, and Julie Kotter
What Dom Cooked for Tommy: Keith Moon Pies 
That's No Jive, Turkey: Luis Guzmán on S.W.A.T.
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Robbie Rist (real) and Cousin Oliver (fake)
Guess This Joe: José Feliciano


=== 1976 ===
Network
Fleetwood Mac
Starland Vocal Band's "Afternoon Delight"
In Search of... 
Laser shows
The Doobie Brothers
The Omen
Rick Dees' "Disco Duck"
Nadia Comăneci
Thin Lizzy
Paul McCartney and Wings
Freaky Friday
Captain and Tennille
King KongCharo TV 1976: Welcome Back, Charo
Porn or Not Porn 1976: The Pom Pom Girls (not porn), Mother, Jugs & Speed (not porn), and Kansas City Trucking Co. (porn)
Then and Now 1976: Jodie Foster, Peter Frampton, and Farrah Fawcett
Guitar Gods of 1976: Ace Frehley (KISS), Keith Richards (Rolling Stones), and Peter Frampton
Survivors of 1976: Jodie Foster, Farrah Fawcett, and The Bionic Woman
What Dom Cooked for Deep Throat: All the President's Meatloaf
That's No Jive, Turkey: Sir Mix-a-Lot on Disco
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Ann B. Davis (real) and Alice Nelson (fake)
Guess This Joe: Joey Lawrence (represented by a picture of a sperm)


=== 1977 ===
Pumping Iron
Billy Beer
Quincy, M.E.
Calgon
The Kentucky Fried Movie
The Joker's Wild
Leif Garrett
Name That Tune
The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries
Plato's Retreat
Ted Nugent
Oh, God!
Slap Shot
Meat Loaf
Elvis dies
The Deep and OrcaCharo TV 1977: Charo's Angels
Porn or Not Porn 1977: Fun with Dick and Jane (not porn), Oh, God! (not porn), and Heavy Machinery (porn)
Then and Now 1977: Leif Garrett, Kojak, and Charo
Guitar Gods of 1977: Mick Jones (Foreigner), Lindsey Buckingham (Fleetwood Mac), and Ted Nugent
Survivors of 1977: Barbara Walters, Laverne DeFazio, and Joyce DeWitt
What Dom Cooked for Mr. Goodbar: Grilled Tony Lo Portobello Mushrooms
That's No Jive, Turkey: Carlos Alazraqui on Billy Beer
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Eve Plumb (real) and Jan Brady (fake)
Guess This Joe: Joey Ramone


=== 1978 ===
Battlestar Galactica
Andy Gibb
Leon Spinks wins Heavyweight Title over Muhammad Ali
Mr. Whipple
Dawn of the Dead (Italian release)
Ginsu
Blondie
Pogo
Barney Miller
Cheryl Tiegs
Billy Joel
Kristy McNichol
Ice Castles
Doctor Who
Devo
Merlin
Heaven Can Wait
Midnight ExpressCharo TV 1978: CHARO in Cincinnati
Porn or Not Porn 1978: The Tender Trap (porn), Goin' South (not porn), and 
Sweet Folds of Flesh (porn)
Then and Now 1978: Loni Anderson, Robby Benson, and Lee Majors
Guitar Gods of 1978: Joe Walsh (Eagles), Mark Knopfler (Dire Straits), and Eddie Van Halen
Survivors of 1978: Mindy McConnell, Tina Turner, and Marilu Henner 
What Dom Cooked for the Bee Gees: Sausage and Pepper's Lonely Hearts Sub
That's No Jive, Turkey: Michael Ian Black on Charmin
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Maureen McCormick (real) and Marcia Brady (fake)
Guess This Joe: Joe Perry


=== 1979 ===
Rock 'n' Roll High School
Charlie Daniels Band's "The Devil Went Down to Georgia"
ESPN
The Amityville Horror
The B-52's' "Rock Lobster"
Frank Zappa's "Joe's Garage"
Trapper John, M.D.
Disco Demolition Night
Tab
The Rose
McDonald's Happy Meals
The White Shadow 
Joe Jackson's "Is She Really Going Out With Him?"
HairCharo TV 1979: Mork & Charo
Porn or Not Porn 1979: Hardcore (not porn), The Black Hole (not porn), and Dracula Sucks (porn)
Then and Now 1979: Nick Nolte, Steve Martin, and Janet Jackson
Guitar Gods of 1979: Angus Young (AC/DC), Glenn Tipton & K. K. Downing (Judas Priest), and Brian May (Queen)
Survivors of 1979: Jerry Hall, Florence Johnston, and Bo Derek
What Dom Cooked for the Dallas Bulls: The North Dallas Forty Ounce Porterhouse
That's No Jive, Turkey: Greg Fitzsimmons on Disco Demolition Night
Hey, I'm Not a Brady: Florence Henderson (real) and Carol Brady (fake)
Guess This Joe: Joe Cool


== External links ==
I Love The 70s: Volume 2 on vh1.com