Title: I Love Trouble (1994 film)
Aspects: {'I Love Trouble'}

I Love Trouble is a 1994 American romantic comedy film starring Julia Roberts and Nick Nolte. It was written and produced by the husband-and-wife team of Nancy Meyers and Charles Shyer, and directed by Shyer.


== Plot synopsis ==
A young married couple is taking photos near a train ready to leave on their honeymoon. They are bumped into by an unknown man who appears to be in a bad mood. After the train takes off, there is a terrible accident, the train derails and many people die.
Two boys come to the scene of the wreckage to steal luggage. In the meantime, Chicago reporters Sabrina Peterson and Peter Brackett work for different newspapers and have a rivalry.
One of the boys calls Sabrina and tells her he's found some interesting evidence she may want to purchase. Sabrina goes to meet the boy but by the time she gets there, he's been killed and his apartment trashed. She notices part of a code on his hand, clearly something he was writing right before he was killed. Sabrina grabs a pen, writes down the code, and runs out of the apartment.


== Cast ==
Julia Roberts - Sabrina Peterson
Nick Nolte - Peter Brackett
Saul Rubinek - Sam Smotherman/Ernesto Vargas
James Rebhorn - The Thin Man
Robert Loggia - Matt Greenfield, Chronicle Editor
Kelly Rutherford - Kim
Olympia Dukakis - Jeannie, Peter's Secretary
Marsha Mason - Senator Gayle Robbins
Eugene Levy - Justice of the Peace
Charles Martin Smith - Rick Medwick
Dan Butler - Wilson Chess
Paul Gleason - Kenny Bacon
Jane Adams - Evans
Lisa Lu - Virginia Harvey
Nora Dunn - Lindy
Megan Cavanagh - Mrs. Delores Beekman


== Production ==
Nolte and Roberts notoriously did not get along with each other during the making of the film.  Roberts has described him as "disgusting," whereas Nolte has said she's "not a nice person."


== Reception ==
The film received negative reviews by critics and grossed over $30 million in box-office receipts in the United States and less than $62 million worldwide.According to Nolte, it's the worst film he has ever appeared in. He felt he sold his soul by doing it, and he did it only for the money. As a result, he was tense while on the set, and did not have a good working-relationship with Julia Roberts.
Roberts has on her part called Nolte the worst actor she has ever worked with. I Love Trouble currently holds a 22% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 46 reviews.


== Music ==
Elmer Bernstein originally wrote the underscore, but his music was thrown out and David Newman called in at such a late stage that posters with Bernstein's name on the credits were already displayed. With only two weeks to rescore the film, Newman - who usually orchestrates the bulk of his scores himself - utilized a small army of orchestrators to help him complete the score: Scott Smalley, Chris Boardman, William Kidd, Peter Tomashek, Steven Bramson, Christopher Klatman, Don Davis, Joel Rosenbaum, Arthur Kempel (misspelt "Kempl" in the end credits), Mark McKenzie, Brad Warnaar (misspelt "Warner" in the end credits) and John Neufeld. The soundtrack album was released by Varèse Sarabande, including a cover version of the Smokey Robinson song "You've Really Got A Hold On Me"; only Smalley and Boardman receive orchestrator credit on the album (however, Ross receives an acknowledgement - as does Alan Silvestri, who was also attached to the project).

Here's Peter (5:09)
Here's Sabrina (1:54)
Calling All Boggs (1:15)
Honeymoon Night (4:55)
Two Scoop Snoops (3:39)
Everybody Buys the Globe (:46)
Scoop de Jour (3:15)
Sabrina's Hip (1:04)
Wild Goose Chase (1:16)
The Beekman Agreement (2:02)
Keyhole Foreplay (1:20)
Happily Ever After (2:21)
"I Love Trouble" (3:43)
You've Really Got a Hold On Me - Robbyn Kirmsse (3:37)


== References ==


== External links ==
I Love Trouble on IMDb
I Love Trouble at AllMovie
I Love Trouble at Rotten Tomatoes
I Love Trouble at Box Office Mojo