Title: List of Seinfeld minor characters
Aspects: {'J. Peterman'}

The television show Seinfeld featured many minor characters.


== Secondary characters ==


=== Character frequency ===


=== Other characters appearing in 5 or more episodes ===

Dr. Tim Whatley (played by Bryan Cranston) – A dentist that was once dubbed "Dentist to the Stars" by George. In "The Yada Yada," he converts to Judaism, according to Jerry "just for the jokes." Jerry's anger at Whatley causes Kramer to call him an "anti-dentite." His giving Jerry a label maker he received from Elaine in the episode "The Label Maker," leads to the term "regifting." In "The Jimmy," Whatley irks Jerry by having Penthouse magazines in his waiting room and by possibly "violating" him while he was unconscious during a tooth filling. Also appears in the episodes "The Mom & Pop Store" and "The Strike" for a total of 5 episodes.

Mr. and Mrs. Ross (played by Warren Frost and Grace Zabriskie) – Parents of Susan, George's fiancée. After Kramer burned down the family's cabin, it was revealed that Mr. Ross had had a homosexual affair with author John Cheever. "Yes, he was the most wonderful person I've ever known. And I loved him deeply! In a way you could never understand." ("The Cheever Letters") Mrs. Ross is a memorable alcoholic who disdains yet tolerates her husband. In the episode "The Wizard," the couple confirms George's longstanding suspicion that they never liked him, and blamed him for Susan's death. In the finale, they get angered at George when Dr. Wexler mentioned the look on George's face upon hearing the news of Susan's death. Mr. Ross is seen buying a gun after learning George was happy after Susan's death.


=== Characters appearing in 2–4 episodes ===
Allison (played by Kari Coleman) – George's ex-girlfriend who he claims is obsessed with him, proven by the fact that she threatened to kill herself if George broke up with her. In the end of the episode "The Smelly Car," Allison compliments the vest of George's other ex-girlfriend, Susan, with whom she is seen watching the pilot program in a later episode, "The Pilot."

Babu Bhatt (played by Brian George) – An immigrant from Pakistan who owns the nearby "Dream Café." Jerry seems to mess up his life at every turn, by giving bad business advice on his restaurant and by not passing on his immigration notice that is accidentally delivered to Jerry's mailbox. Babu thinks that Jerry is a "very, very bad man" (wagging his finger).

Barbara "Babs" Kramer (played by Sheree North) – Cosmo Kramer's mother. She used to be a matron in the women's restroom at a restaurant, but was persuaded by Kramer to resign from that job and pursue an undefined venture with him. Although first mentioned in "The Nose Job," her first on-screen appearance is in "The Switch" where she also unintentionally reveals Kramer's first name to be Cosmo and has a sexual encounter with Newman. Babs was once addicted to alcohol and drugs claiming to have been "clean" for two years.
Beth Luchner (played by Debra Messing) – A physician who appears in "The Wait Out." Married first to David Luchner. Later appears in "The Yada Yada" with her new husband, Arnie.
Bob and Ray/Cedric (played by Yul Vazquez and John Paragon) – A hostile homosexual couple that accost Cosmo Kramer in "The Soup Nazi," "The Sponge" and "The Puerto Rican Day." They are widely known as "street toughs." They steal Elaine's armoire that Kramer is guarding in "The Soup Nazi," verbally and physically attack him for not wearing an AIDS walk ribbon in "The Sponge," and attack him when he accidentally sets fire to a Puerto Rican flag. John Paragon's character is credited as "Ray" in "The Soup Nazi," but is addressed and credited as "Cedric" in "The Sponge."

Bob Cobb (played by Mark Metcalf) – A conductor who prefers to be called "Maestro" and has a villa in Tuscany. Cobb introduced Kramer and Frank Costanza to the trick of taking their pants off before sitting so the pants will "keep the crease." The character is named after the inventor of the Cobb Salad.
Carol (played by Lisa Mende) – Mutual friend of the main characters. Carol and her husband, Michael, lived in the Hamptons, and she kept insisting that the group come out to see their baby. She had two babies, an unnamed daughter that was dropped by Kramer in "The Boyfriend," and a son named Adam (although unseen) that was introduced in "The Hamptons". Kramer once likened the cute baby to Lyndon Johnson while Elaine compared the ugly one to a Pekingese. Carol is notable for her nasal voice and her memorable quote: "You gotta see the baby!" pr "You gotta have a baby!" in "The Soul Mate." Her final appearance was in "The English Patient," when she and her friends shunned Elaine after she showed her dislike for the film of the same name.
Counter Woman: (played by Kathryn Kates) – In the episodes "The Dinner Party (Seinfeld)" from season 5 and "The Rye" from season 7, the Counter Woman works at Schnitzer's Bakery. In season 5, the Counter Woman ignores the fact that Jerry and Elaine came in ahead of David and Barbara Benedict, a couple on their way to the same dinner party who purchase the last chocolate babka. The Counter Woman makes another appearance and is seemingly happy to give her last marble rye bread to Mabel Choate (a woman who was ahead of Jerry).
Dana Foley: (played by Gina Hecht) – A friend of Elaine's who works as a therapist, and gives George several therapy sessions. She appears in "The Pick," "The Shoes" and "The Pilot." George walks out on her after she modestly criticizes the script of "Jerry."
Deena: (played by Mary Jo Keenen) – A childhood friend of George who thinks that he is mentally unstable after she repeatedly catches him in bizarre situations. First, in "The Gum", she notices striking similarities between George's behavior and that of her mentally unstable father (affectionately known by all as 'Pop'), that being "nervousness, irritability, and paranoia". Her suspicions are heightened when she sees him walking down the street in a King Henry VIII costume telling people he just left the "institution." Then in "The Doll" she catches him in the coffee shop, alone and screaming at a doll that looks like his mother. Finally in "The Bottle Deposit," she is visiting her father at the mental asylum when she runs into a hysterical George (who was mistakenly sent there by Mr. Steinbrenner). She ignores his pleas to help him escape believing that he is finally getting the help he needs.
Dolores (played by Susan Walters) – One of Jerry's many girlfriends; he does not remember her name, only that it rhymes with a female body part ("Clitoris" not occurring to him, his best guess: "Mulva"). ("The Junior Mint"). Jerry reunites with her in "The Foundation."
Donald Sanger, aka The Bubble Boy (voiced by Jon Hayman) – Jerry agrees to visit a bubble boy, who lives in a hermetically sealed bubble due to a compromised immune system. Jerry gets lost on the way and George and Susan end up meeting the bubble boy but finds he is a bratty spoiled kid. George and Donald get in a fight over a typographical error on a Trivial Pursuit card, when it says the Moops (rather than the Moors) invaded Spain. The fight results in the boy's bubble being popped.
Dr. Reston (played by Stephen McHattie) – Elaine and Crazy Joe Davola's therapist. Elaine dated him and went on a trip to Europe with him ("The Pitch" and "The Ticket").
Earl Haffler (portrayed by O'Neal Compton) – Appeared in "The Diplomat's Club." He made bets with Kramer on which planes coming to the airport would arrive later than scheduled. Earl appears again in "The English Patient," where his deal with Kramer to buy "Cubans" falls through and he orders Cosmo out of his office.
Father Curtis: (played by Henry Woronicz) – A priest who consults with Elaine and Puddy on their relationship in "The Burning," and with Jerry on his encounter with Tim Whatley in "The Yada Yada."
Franklin Delano Romanowski (played by Mike McShane) – Also known as "FDR," Franklin is another of Kramer's eccentric friends. In "The Betrayal," he uses his birthday wish against Kramer as the result of a grudge held after Kramer struck him in the back of the head with a snowball. The same actor also appears briefly in "The Wizard" as the hot dog vendor talking with George. Although his character's name is not revealed, he is presumably the same character because he was seen selling hot dogs in "The Betrayal" also. He is mentioned by Kramer in several episodes, usually in some outrageous anecdote.
Fred Yerkes: (played by Fred Stoller) – Elaine had met him at a party some time before, but his lack of recall for the meeting mesmerizes her. He appears in "The Secret Code" in Season 7.
Gary Fogel (played by Jon Lovitz) he made his only appearance in "The Scofflaw," although he is mentioned again in "The Face Painter."

Izzy Mandelbaum (played by Lloyd Bridges) – Fellow resident of Jerry's parents in Del Boca Vista in Florida; head of family-owned Magic Pan crepe restaurants. His favorite saying is "It's go time!" He is obsessed with his physical fitness. In "The English Patient", he throws his back out twice after being "challenged" by Jerry. Izzy also appears in "The Blood".
Jake Jarmel (played by Marty Rackham) – An author that Elaine dated for a period. Dislikes using exclamation marks in "The Sniffing Accountant." Broke up with Elaine after she bought Jujyfruits immediately after hearing he was in a car accident ("The Opposite"). Bought his glasses in Malaysia so no one else would have a pair like them ("The Scofflaw"). He started a fight with Mr. Lippman when he noticed that Lippman had the same "unique" frames as himself. The actor who plays Jake Jarmel also appears as an LAPD officer in the episode "The Trip."
Jenna (played by Kristin Davis) – Jerry's girlfriend on Season's 8 "The Pothole." She later dates Kenny Bania, as shown in Season 9's "The Butter Shave."
Jiffy Park Guy/Jiffy Dump Guy (played by Chaim Girafi) – An attendant at Jiffy Park who may or may not be utilizing George's car, along with other cars parked on the lot, as a den of iniquity for prostitutes to conduct their business in the episode "The Wig Master." His second appearance was in "The Muffin Tops" where he portrayed the late-night operator of sister-company Jiffy Dump who steadfastly refuses to accept trash bags of discarded muffin stumps.
Joe Temple (played by Robert Hooks) – A family man with whom George watches Breakfast at Tiffany's in the episode "The Couch." Joe dislikes George after he spills grape juice on his couch. Joe also appears in "The Diplomat's Club," in which George tries to watch another film with him.
Joey Zanfino (played by Todd Bosley) – A 9-year-old boy who lives in the same apartment building as Jerry, Kramer and Newman. Joey's mother asks Kramer to babysit him but due to his staggering walk (caused by his ultra-tight jeans), this results in Joey mistaking him for Frankenstein's monster and running away. By his second appearance, they are friends and go to the same karate class, despite Kramer being many years older. Joey and his friends later beat up Kramer because he was able to beat them so easily in Karate. He appears in both Season 7's The Wait Out and Season 8's The Foundation. Joey is also mentioned in Season 9's "The Serenity Now," as he and his friends fight with Kramer, which leads him to a nervous breakdown and to destroy George's computers.
Karen (played by Lisa Edelstein) – George's girlfriend in "The Mango" and "The Masseuse."
Karl (played by Ellis Williams) – A professional exterminator that Jerry hires to rid his apartment of fleas in "The Doodle." In "The Diplomat's Club," George befriends Karl in an attempt to prove to co-worker Mr. Morgan that he is not a racist.
Katie (played by Debra Jo Rupp) – Jerry's annoying agent. First in "The Diplomat's Club," she invites the pilot of the plane to Jerry's comedy routine and tells Jerry not to be nervous, which makes Jerry extremely nervous and causes him to "bomb." Next in "The Abstinence," Katie gets Jerry an entire assembly at his former junior high school after Jerry is "bumped" at Career Day by a zoo worker. Jerry is unprepared for the assembly, and after he tells his first joke, he is met with boos. Consequently, David Letterman cancels Jerry's appearance on his talk show after hearing about his poor performance at the assembly.
Keith Hernandez (played by Keith Hernandez) – fictionalized version of the baseball player, who befriends Jerry and later dates Elaine in "The Boyfriend".
Kevin (played by Tim DeKay) – Elaine's one-time boyfriend, most notable for being "The Bizarro Jerry." He dates Elaine in two Season 8 episodes, "The Soul Mate" and "The Bizarro Jerry."
Leslie (played by Wendel Meldrum) – Kramer's "low-talking" girlfriend, a clothing designer who designed the new puffy shirt featured in "The Puffy Shirt" episode. She also appeared in "The Finale" as a witness in the trial, but her testimony is not accepted because no one in the courtroom can hear her. Jackie Chiles tells Judge Arthur Vandelay to either get Leslie a microphone or they should move on with the trial.
Lindsay Enright (played by Jessica Hecht) – An ex-girlfriend of George's who was in a book club in "The Couch." They were supposed to read Breakfast at Tiffany's, but George watched the film instead and stated incorrect facts about the book. She then appears in "The Gymnast."

Lloyd Braun (played first by Peter Keleghan, then by Matt McCoy) – A childhood friend of George's. Estelle Costanza would badger George with "Why can't you be more like Lloyd Braun?" In "The Non-Fat Yogurt," Lloyd worked for David Dinkins until he passed along Elaine's suggestion that everyone in New York City wear name tags. Dinkins lost the race and Braun had a nervous breakdown. (The episode, which aired two days after the real mayoral election, was shot in two forms; had Dinkins been re-elected, Braun would've instead served in, and by taking Elaine's advice ruined, Rudy Giuliani's campaign.) After spending time in a mental institution, Lloyd helped Kramer gain historical status for a movie theater, in "The Gum." In "The Serenity Now," Braun worked for a short time for George's father, Frank Costanza, allegedly selling computers (although the phone line he was "using" wasn't connected). Larry David named the Lloyd Braun character after the real-life Lloyd Braun, who was David's lawyer and manager.
Lt. Joe Bookman (played by Philip Baker Hall) – A library cop whom Jerry has eluded since his 1971 checkout of Tropic of Cancer. His dedication to his job and coincidental surname are cause for Jerry's dismissive attitude towards him. His character is defined by his deadpan delivery (a parody of Sgt. Joe Friday in Dragnet) and tendency to dramatically flip his trench coat during interrogations. Appears in "The Library" and "The Finale, Part 2."
Mabel Choate (played by Frances Bay) – The old woman at Schnitzer's bakery who bought the infamous last marble rye, which Jerry went on to steal from her on the street in order to give to George to carry out one of his numerous idiotic schemes. She reappeared in a later episode at Phase Two of the Pines of Mar Gables to cast the deciding vote in Morty's impeachment, when she recognized Jerry as the thief of her rye. She also appears in the final episode of the series as a witness testifying against Jerry, again bringing up the marble rye.
Marcelino (played by Miguel Sandoval) – The owner of the bodega on Jerry's block. In Season 8 "The Little Jerry," he runs an illegal cockfighting ring in the back of his store. In "The Millennium," Kramer mentions that Marcelino is 1/64th Mayan. Marcelino also appears in "The Finale" where he testifies about the cockfighting ring where he only quoted "cockfighting."
Marla Penny aka "The Virgin" (played by Jane Leeves) – A professional closet organizer whom Jerry dates. She eventually loses her virginity to John F. Kennedy, Jr. She appears in "The Virgin," "The Contest," Part Two of "The Pilot" and "The Finale."
Matthew (played by John Christian Graas) – Son of the purveyor of the "fat-free" yogurt, Matthew is a 10-year-old boy who idolizes Jerry. In The Non-Fat Yogurt he overhears Jerry swearing, and, following his idol's lead, refers to Jerry as a "funny fucker". He ruins an audiocassette of Jerry's comedy. When the yogurt is revealed to have fat, Matthew cusses out Jerry. Matthew first appears in "The Parking Space" in Season 3 and puts in his two cents over whether George has a parking space.
Mel Sanger (played by Brian Doyle-Murray) – A Yoo-Hoo truck driver who is the father of Donald Sanger. Mel appears to be very loving, but is frustrated about several things, including when people believe the bubble is like an igloo and the fact that his son Donald has the TV remote constantly. He appeared in "The Bubble Boy", "The Pilot" Pt. 2, and "The Finale" Pt. 2.
Mike Moffit (played by Lee Arenberg) – Calls Jerry a "phony" behind his back and gets into an argument with George over a parking space in front of Jerry's apartment ("The Parking Space"). He also appears as Kramer's bookie in "The Susie," in which Jerry accidentally breaks his thumbs and traps him in the trunk of Jerry's car.

Mr. Kruger (played by Daniel von Bargen) – President of Kruger Industrial Smoothing, for which George Costanza works during most of the ninth and final season. Kruger is noted for his total apathy towards his job and the success of his company. George's description of the company is "Kruger Industrial Smoothing: 'We don't care, and it shows'" ("The Strike"). George is often forced to push Kruger to do his work, to which Kruger usually responds, "I'm not too worried about it." He also attends the Festivus dinner. Kruger's company "botched the Statue of Liberty" job as they "couldn't get the green stuff off" and is infamous for losing money (when viewing the company financial reports Kruger nonchalantly exclaimed, "wow, we really took it on the chin last year"). Kruger appears in four episodes: "The Slicer," "The Strike," "The Burning" and "The Maid."
Mr. Morgan (played by Tom Wright) – A co-worker of George's at Yankee Stadium. He appears in four episodes, "The Pledge Drive," where George convinces Mr. Morgan that the Yankees should send a player to a PBS fundraiser after he sees George eating a candy bar with a knife and fork; "The Diplomat's Club," where he hints that George had a racial bias after George said that he looked like Sugar Ray Leonard; "The Mom and Pop Store," where George calls a meeting to convince the Yankees to have a "Jon Voight Day," and Mr. Morgan proposes they have no more meetings called by George; and "The Wink," where George causes a dispute with Mr. Morgan, his wife, and Mr. Steinbrenner by winking involuntarily, ultimately leading to Mr. Morgan's termination, and George being promoted to his position.
Mr. Tomasulo (played by Gordon Jump) – George's boss at "Play Now" in episodes 1 and 2 of Season 9, "The Butter Shave" and "The Voice."
Mrs. Zanfino (played by Diana Castle) – A woman who lives with her son Joey in the same apartment building as Jerry, Kramer and Newman. She asks Kramer to babysit Joey in Season 7's "The Wait Out," and appears again in Season 8's "The Foundation," when she drives Kramer, Joey and a few other kids from the Karate class. Mrs. Zanfino is also mentioned in Season 8's "The Fatigues," when Kramer is cooking food for a Jewish singles night, and uses her kitchen to make Kugel.
Nana (played by Billye Ree Wallace) – Nana is Jerry's grandmother and the mother of Helen Seinfeld and Uncle Leo. When her mind starts to mix up the present and the past, she reveals that Uncle Leo owes his sister, Jerry's mom, $50 from a racetrack bet their father won when they were kids.
Noreen (played by Kelly Coffield) – A former US Army soldier and friend of Elaine's who dated Dan, the high talker. Elaine continuously destroyed Noreen's life until Kramer intervened and urged her to return to the military. She attempted to commit suicide, but Frank Costanza's cape-wearing lawyer (played by Larry David) stopped her.
Peggy (played by Megan Cole) – She appeared in season 8 "The Susie" as Elaine's coworker at J. Peterman Catalog who mistakes Elaine for someone named Susie. She also appears in a season 9 episode "The Apology" and revealed to be a germophobe.
Ping (played by Ping Wu) – A Chinese food delivery boy, who sues Elaine after hitting a car while trying to avoid colliding with her as she is jaywalking as mentioned in "The Visa." In "The Tape," when George calls a Chinese company to order hair growth cream, Ping acts as the interpreter.
Poppie (played by Reni Santoni) – The owner of an Italian restaurant who disapproves of abortion, tells traumatizing stories of his mother's death, is very strict on his idea of what pizza is, and developed stress-activated incontinence because of Elaine, which further causes him to stain Jerry's couch ("The Couch"). The "Poppie couch" turns up in "The Doorman." First appeared in "The Pie," in which Jerry is disgusted by Poppie's neglecting to wash his hands in the bathroom. Also appears in "The Finale."
Rabbi Glickman (played by Bruce Mahler) – A rabbi who befriends Elaine, makes a clumsy play for her at one point, and is a terrible secret keeper. He appears in "The Postponement," "The Serenity Now" and "The Finale."
Rachel Goldstein (played by Melanie Smith) – Jerry's most dated girlfriend in the series, having appeared in four episodes (including a two-part episode). In "The Raincoats," she and Jerry make out while watching Schindler's List and are seen by Newman, who informs Jerry's and Rachel's parents of the incident. As a result, her father tells Jerry she won't be seeing him again but they are still together later in the series. In "The Hamptons," Rachel accidentally walks in on George naked while he is a victim of "shrinkage," having just gotten out of the pool. She tells George's girlfriend, who immediately returns home as a result. In "The Opposite, she breaks up with Jerry who quickly says he'll find somebody else as things always even out for him.
Ramon (played by Carlos Jacott) – An annoying pool boy at Jerry's former health club who tried to become friends with Jerry, but Jerry did not want to be friends with Ramon because he did not need a fourth friend. Of course, Ramon thought it was because he cleaned pools for a living. He later becomes friends with Newman. He was originally fired from the health club for using too much chlorine but has his job back there again for unknown reasons. Some time later at the health club he is nearly killed when Jerry pulls him into the pool and Newman suddenly jumps on him whilst yelling "Ollie ollie oxen free!" During this incident, Jerry and Newman don't give him CPR and have their gym memberships terminated for failing to try to save Ramon's life ("The Pool Guy"). He also appears in the courtroom in "The Finale." A deleted scene has him mentioning how Jerry and Newman argued over who would perform CPR on him.
Rebecca DeMornay (played by Sonya Eddy) – A thrift store clerk and former book store clerk who is in a constant state of agitation and is prone to violence. In another episode she works with the homeless. She once threatened to jump over the counter and punch George "in the brain" after he brought in a used book that had been in the toilet. In one episode she confronted Elaine in an enraged manner over Muffin bottoms that had been left behind the homeless shelter she worked at. Appears in "The Bookstore" and "The Muffin Tops."
Remy Temple (played by Diana Theodore) – Joe Temple's daughter. She is a great fan of Audrey Hepburn and watched Breakfast at Tiffany's with her father and George in "The Couch." She appears again in "The Diplomat's Club" when George brings another Audrey Hepburn film, but her father tells her to get up to the apartment instantly before George came up.
Ricky (played by Sam Lloyd) – The man who takes Frank Constanza's TV Guide from Elaine in the subway and later turns it into a bouquet to declare his affection for her during "The Cigar Store Indian." He briefly appears in a later episode "The Pie", where it is revealed he designed a mannequin which looks like Elaine.
Robin (played by Melanie Chartoff) – A waitress at the comedy club that was one of George's ex-girlfriends in "The Fire" until she broke up with him for his cowardice over a small kitchen fire at her son's birthday party and a prop gun at Ronnie's comedy performance. She later appeared in "The Finale" Pt. 2 where she recapped the incident at her son's birthday party.
Rusty (played by Jon Gries) – A homeless man who falsely identifies Kramer in a police lineup and is hired by Kramer and Newman as labor for their short-lived rickshaw venture. During his trial run, Rusty stole the rickshaw. He appears in "The Beard" and "The Bookstore."
Sal Bass (played by Tony Amendola): Kramer meets him at the health club and thinks he is Salman Rushdie. In "The Pilot," Sal Bass is shown watching Jerry's pilot program with Sidra. Out of the blue, Bass remarks, "You know, that Kim Novak had some really large breasts."

Sally Weaver (played by Kathy Griffin) – Susan Ross's roommate in college, originally from Memphis, Tennessee, she appears in "The Cartoon" and "The Doll" as an aspiring actress and comedian. In "The Doll," she was indirectly responsible for ruining Jerry's bit for The Charles Grodin Show, not once but twice. In "The Cartoon" she becomes famous and even gets a cable special for her one-woman show, titled "Jerry Seinfeld is the Devil," which naturally becomes a favorite of Newman's. In "The Doll," it was revealed that Sally was an executive at Federal Express.
Scott Drake (played by Rick Overton): A mutual friend of the main characters, often referred to with the phrases "Love the Drake" or "Hate the Drake." Jerry, George, Elaine and Kramer give him and his fiancée a big screen TV as a wedding gift, only to find out soon after that they have broken up and his ex-fiancée, the "Drakette," gave it away to charity. In "The Pilot, Part 2," the Drake and Drakette (who have gotten back together) are seen watching Jerry's pilot program on a small, handheld black and white television. In "The Label Maker," he is engaged to marry the Drakette again, but they break up after he learns that the wedding is on the same day as the Super Bowl and tries to postpone it.
Shlomo: (played by Reuven Bar-Yotam): Appears in Season's 8 "The Muffin Tops" as a foreign guy on Kramer's "Peterman Reality Tour" bus, who questions the pizza-pound cake. In Season's 9 "The Frogger," he appears again as Shlomo the truck driver, who George hires to help him move the Frogger machine.
Sid (played by Jay Brooks): Professional car parker. George fills in for him briefly in "The Alternate Side" and fails miserably, causing Sid's nephew to lose his foot to amputation because George's incompetence caused several of Sid's regular customers to quit. This created a significant loss of income to Sid, thereby rendering him unable to finance his nephew's operation. Sid appears again in "The Parking Space."
Sid Farkus (played by Patrick Cronin): Middle-manager of a women's underwear manufacturing company and friend of Frank Costanza. Interviews George for a bra salesman position and ends up hiring him, only to reverse his decision after George hits on Sid's boss Ellen De Granmont (Christa Miller) ("The Sniffing Accountant"). Later meets with Frank and Kramer to discuss manufacturing the bro/manssiere in "The Doorman." Wears Ban-Lon. He dates Estelle Costanza briefly while she and Frank are separated.
Sidra Holland (played by Teri Hatcher): Jerry's date in "The Implant." Known for her breasts and catch phrase "They're real and they're spectacular." She also appears in "The Pilot," watching Jerry's pilot program with Sal Bass, and in "The Finale," sleeping with Jackie Chiles.

Sue Ellen Mischke (played by Brenda Strong): Known as the "bra-less wonder," heiress to the Oh Henry! candy bar fortune, and nemesis of Elaine, whom she knew since they attended high school together in Maryland. She bids up the price of a set of golf clubs once owned by John F. Kennedy, which Elaine's boss J. Peterman had asked Elaine to buy at an auction, exceeding his limit. In "The Caddy, Elaine is so incensed that Sue Ellen doesn't wear a bra that she gives her a bra as a gift, which Sue Ellen then promptly wears as a top. This causes Kramer to crash George's car when he and Jerry see her walking in her bra down the street. The courtroom scene that follows is an allusion to the O.J. Simpson trial, ending with Jackie Chiles exclaiming that a bra has to be worn up against the skin, "like a glove." In "The Betrayal," Sue Ellen invites Elaine (accompanied by Jerry and George) to India for her wedding. Elaine and Sue Ellen briefly reconcile their animosity before it is revealed that Elaine once had a relationship with Sue Ellen's groom. She also appears in "The Bottle Deposit, Part 1" and "The Abstinence." A character named Sue Ellen Mischke was mentioned in the pilot episode of the sitcom Happy Days.
The Doctor (Siegel/Wexler) (played by Victor Raider-Wexler): The doctor who performed the surgery in "The Junior Mint," he was also the doctor who broke the news of Susan's death in "The Invitations" and who diagnosed George's atrophied condition in "The Summer of George." Also testified in "The Finale" about George's reaction to the news of Susan's death, which he described as "restrained jubilation" which caused Susan's parents to be angry with him.
The Soup Nazi (played by Larry Thomas): Based on a real person (Al Yeganeh), the Soup Nazi is a soup chef who often denied customers his delicious soup for the slightest misbehavior with the admonition, "NO soup for you!" The character's name, revealed in "The Finale," is Yev Kassem.
Tia Van Camp (played by Jennifer Campbell): Blonde supermodel whom Jerry is seated next to on an airplane flight back to New York ("The Airport"). Jerry gets a date with Tia. Tia eventually dumps Jerry in "The Pick" when she notices him in his car, appearing to pick his nose.
Tina Robbins: (played by Siobhan Fallon Hogan): A "waitress/actress" (although she considers herself an "actress/waitress") who is Elaine's roommate in her original apartment, later moving out and sub-letting it to her. She is introduced in "The Deal" and dates Kramer in "The Truth," much to the dismay of Elaine, who complains about the loud tribal music and sexual noises in her apartment. Elaine describes her acting as "Ethel Merman, but without the talent." She makes a brief appearance in "The Opposite," kicking Elaine out of her apartment for, among other things, buzzing up a jewel thief and using Canadian quarters in the washing machine.
Vanessa (played by Lynn Clark): An attractive woman whom Jerry meets at a birthday party in "The Stake Out" (Season 1, Episode 2). They date once in "The Stock Tip" (Season 1, Episode 5).
Walter: (played by Wayne Wilderson): Co-worker of Elaine at J. Peterman. He appears in four episodes: "The Summer of George," "The Merv Griffin Show," "The Apology" and "The Frogger."
Wyck Thayer (played by Bruce Davison): Chairman of the Susan Ross Foundation, who assumes that George actually killed Susan. Appeared in the first two episodes of the eighth season, as well as "The Van Buren Boys" later in the same season. George consistently calls Wyck "Wink."


=== Unseen characters ===
Bob Sacamano – One of Kramer's best friends, who is often referred to as the source of nutty ideas or inaccurate information. He is from New Jersey. Bob's father lives in Florida and is the source of faulty electronic organizers known as "Willards" (instead of the more expensive "Wizards") that foil Kramer's run for condo board president. In "The Heart Attack," Kramer explains how Bob had a botched hernia operation, so that now he has a high-pitched voice and spends his days in a wheelchair. He also had rabies at some point. Bob worked, for a time, in a condom factory and provided a bag of defective condoms to Kramer in "The Fix-Up," which George then used with Elaine's friend, briefly thinking he had impregnated her as a result. Bob once stayed at Kramer's apartment as a guest for a year and a half. Larry Charles created Sacamano, naming him after a real-life friend. Bob also befriended Jerry when Jerry and Kramer trade apartments. Jerry adds that Bob sells Russian hats in Battery Park for $40. The hats are made from nutria, a type of rat, instead of sable. In the ninth season episode "The Wizard," Kramer states that Bob Sacamano's father (Bob Sacamano Sr.) lives in Florida.
Don Ramsey Really good looking guy on the 5th floor of Elaine's building, from "The Postponement".
Cousin Jeffrey – Jerry's horse-faced cousin, about whom Uncle Leo always raves. He worked for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation. Jeffrey once got Jerry tickets to a Paul Simon concert, and a glasses-less George once claimed to see Jeffrey kissing Jerry's girlfriend in the street (it turned out to be a policewoman patting a horse). According to Uncle Leo, Jeffrey's favorite animal is the leopard because he likes the spots, and he keeps in close contact with his college botany professor, a friendship which Leo thinks is rare. Jeffrey received a citation from the city for his edible foliage tour through Central Park. The back of Cousin Jeffrey's head can be seen in the deleted scenes for "The Glasses" episode on the season DVD.
Doug – Kramer's cop buddy featured in "The Frogger." Kramer finds caution tape in the evidence room while the cops are worried about "The Lopper."
Lomez – An unseen friend of Kramer's. He is an Orthodox Jew, "old school," according to Kramer in "The Fatigues." In The Betrayal, Kramer bangs on the door of a portable toilet yelling "Come on Lomez, we're going to miss the movie!" When Kramer starts the Peterman Reality Bus Tour in "The Muffin Tops," he notes Lomez's place of worship on the tour. Kramer purchases a hot tub from Lomez and speaks on the phone to him while taking a shower in "The Apology." In "The Package," Kramer tells Jerry that he traded his stereo to Lomez for some steaks. In "The Voice," Kramer's intern Darren tells Jerry and George that "Mr. Kramer's in a meeting with Mr. Lomez." And in "The Van Buren Boys," one of the Susan Ross Scholarship interviewees is credited, although not mentioned, as Lomez Junior. His relation, if any, to Lomez remains unknown as his only line is "You like that, don't you?" when George mentions that he has a 4.0 GPA. In "The Slicer," Kramer tells Elaine that Lomez blew his neighbor's circuit to stop an incessant alarm, prompting her to do the same. Later in the same episode, Kramer tells Elaine that, in blowing his neighbor's circuit, Lomez caused the automatic cat feeder to stop functioning, resulting in incessant meowing from the neighbor's cat. When Elaine asks Kramer what Lomez did about it, he replies that "He moved to a motel and the cat eventually died."
Jay Riemenschneider – A friend of Kramer's. Kramer once mentioned that Jay "eats horse (meat) all the time" and buys it from his butcher ("The Seven").
Corky Ramirez – A friend of Kramer's "up on 94th street" ("The Little Kicks"). Friends with Brody (Neil Giuntoli), a film bootlegger whom he introduced to Kramer ("The Little Kicks"). A friend of Kramer's called "Ramirez" appears at a bar in "The Van Buren Boys."
Len Nicademo – A friend of Kramer. Kramer moved in with Len when Len "had the gout" ("The Stand In").
Specter – A friend of Kramer's. Was said to have a fat fetish and that he never dated a woman under 250 lbs. Specter was also said to become a minimalist in "The Tape," which Jerry thought should conflict with his fat fetish.
Jerry's sister – Referenced in "The Chinese Restaurant."
Douglas – Jerry's cousin, who in "The Truth" is revealed to have spent time in a mental institution.
George's brother – Referenced in "The Suicide" and "The Parking Space."
Gail – Elaine's sister who was referenced in "The Airport," "The Stake Out" and "The Pick."
Elaine's nephew – One of many recipients of a Christmas card Elaine sends out that inadvertently reveals her nipple ("The Pick").
Simons – One of George's friends who gave him stock exchange advice in the episode "The Stock Tip."
Aunt Sylvia – Jerry refers to his Aunt Sylvia during a conversation with Elaine on her front stoop in the episode "The Soup."  Jerry also refers to her in the Episode "The Soup" when he says talking to Elaine is like talking to his Aunt Sylvia.
Sharon Besser – A woman from Jerry's past who in 1973 played a part in either the "greatest moment" or "worst moment" of his life. Mentioned in "The Pony Remark."
Jerry "Pachyderm" Persheck – Also known as "The Derm," Jerry is referenced by all four major characters in the episode "The Stand-In". One evening Pachyderm exclaimed that he was going to approach a woman; however, before approaching her he grabbed two pieces of pizza that were much too hot with his bare hands. Pachyderm, determined to approach the woman, held the two burning pieces of pizza in his hands until he resorted to juggling them which ultimately resulted in him throwing the pizza in the air. According to Elaine, the whole place "went crazy" when one piece landed on Pachyderm's face and the other landed on the woman's face. At the end of the episode George's girlfriend leaves him for Pachyderm, who has apparently resorted to repeating the pizza event as a way to pick up women.
Ed Roidlick – A Seinfeld family connection in the advertising industry that Morty and Helen Seinfeld want Jerry to contact (and give up comedy) when they learn he has bounced a check ("The Little Jerry").
Dr. Bison – Jackie Chiles' doctor who is mentioned by Chiles in numerous episodes.
Suzy – Jackie Chiles' receptionist/secretary who usually sets up appointments with Dr. Bison, but seems to appear in the series finale with Jackie Chiles.
Harry Fleming – Morty Seinfeld's former employer as mentioned while in a meeting with J. Peterman, as he refers to 5:15 as "all hours of the night."
Mr. Wilkinson – Simons's friend who invested millions into Sendrax ("The Stock Tip").
Paco, a cook at Monk's Café, known for leaving rubber bands in the soup ("The Strike").
Aunt Baby – George's aunt who died at age 7 ("The Money").
Uncle Mo – George's paternal uncle who died a young man of internal problems ("The Money").
Hennie – George's maternal cousin, once removed ("The Money"), who, according to Frank Costanza was "sickly from the day I met her."
Marvin Kessler – An apparent friend of the Seinfelds, whose death at age 96 prompts Morty and Helen to visit New York to attend the funeral ("The Blood").
Patty Lawrence – Jerry's ex-girlfriend who assures him by phone that she had orgasms while they were dating ("The Mango").
Mr. Papanickolas – A neighborhood local whom Kramer mentions witnessed Newman fake a suicide by jumping from the second floor of his apartment building ("The Revenge").
Ray McKigney – A hand model, who had "The most exquisite hands you've ever seen." Tragically, he could've had any woman in the world, but none could match the beauty of his own hand. He was so in love his own hands that he "was not master of his own domain", and masturbated so much that "The muscles became so strained with overuse, that eventually the hand locked into a deformed position, and he was left with nothing but a claw." "He traveled the world seeking a cure: acupuncturists, herbalists, swamis, nothing helped." "Towards the end, his hands became so frozen that he was unable to manipulate utensils, and was dependent on Cub Scouts to feed him."("The Puffy Shirt")


=== Imaginary characters and pseudonyms ===
Buck Naked – In "The Outing" George revealed that if he were to be a porn star, his name would be "Buck Naked."
Eduardo Corrochio – Elaine Benes's imaginary matador boyfriend in "The Good Samaritan." Not to be confused with the Spanish-born tap-dancing champion whom she may or may not have met at either Zabar's or Ray's Pizza.
Whitey Fisk – George's imaginary friend. George tells Jerry and Elaine that he saw Last Tango in Paris with him. Jerry claims Whitey is the "Summer Jerry," due to the fact that they were supposedly best friends when Jerry was away at camp.
Art Vandelay – George's imaginary alter-ego, which is referenced in many episodes. In "The Finale," the name of the judge is coincidentally Arthur Vandelay.
Kel Varnsen – An alias used by Jerry in "The Boyfriend," in order to help George with his Vandelay Industries. He also uses this alias in "The Puerto Rican Day."
H.E. Pennypacker – Kramer appears as H. E. Pennypacker, "a wealthy industrialist." In order to help Elaine get revenge on Putumayo in "The Millennium," Kramer (as "Pennypacker") attempts to use his pricing gun to greatly reduce the prices of the store's clothing. When Kramer inadvertently crushes the pricing gun, he removes the desiccants from some of the clothes (which will make clothes noticeably musty in five years), and tells Gladys Mayo, "I think I'm going to build a roller coaster instead." He also uses the alias in "The Puerto Rican Day" where he poses as a buyer interested in an apartment in order to use its bathroom.
Martin van Nostrand or Peter von Nostrand – As Dr. Martin von Nostrand, Kramer tried to get Elaine's medical chart in "The Package." He also used the von Nostrand alias in "The Slicer," posing as a Juilliard-trained dermatologist, and is recognized as Dr. von Nostrand in "The Strike." Kramer used the name Martin von Nostrand (without the "doctor" prefix) while auditioning for the role of himself on the show Jerry in "The Pilot, Part 1." Kramer posed as Professor Peter von Nostrand in "The Nose Job" in order to retrieve a jacket from another man's apartment.
Wanda Pepper – An alias used by Elaine in "The Nose Job" in order to pick up Kramer's jacket.
Dylan Murphy – An alias used by Jerry in "The Limo."
Colin O'Brien – An alias used by George in "The Limo."
Susie – An alter ego created by Elaine in "The Susie," who Peggy believes is real and with whom J. Peterman claims to have had an affair while he is speaking at her funeral. Susie hates when people refer to her as "Suze," which she considers to be the name of a "pom-pom-wavin', backseat bimbo."
Paloma – Elaine's alias as Uncle Leo's nurse in "The Package" in order to get cream for her rash and eyebrows for Uncle Leo.
Steven Snell – Kramer's character on Murphy Brown during a short stint as an actor in Los Angeles.
Slappy White – Jerry's alias he claims to have used in Atlantic City during "The Money," to cover up for the fact that he bought his parents back the Cadillac that they sold. The real Slappy White was a comedian who died a year before the episode.
Snoopy and Prickly Pete – George's imaginary horses, conjured up in "The Wizard" as part of his attempt to convince Susan's parents that he had a lavish home in The Hamptons that included a stable.
Pepe – George's made-up chef in the play "La Cocina" that he made up during a meeting with NBC.
Harry Fong – An alias George uses in "The Opera" for a man he scalped his Pagliacci ticket to when questioned by Susan about their encounter, claiming him to be a good friend.
Vegetable Lasagna – A name Puddy comes up with in "The Butter Shave" for a fellow plane passenger Elaine pretends to flirt with when trying to make Puddy jealous after they break up prior to their flight home from a trip in Europe. They subsequently get back together and break up again before their plane lands.


== References ==


== External links ==
Seinfeld on IMDb