Title: Type B videotape
Aspects: {'B type'}

1 inch type B VTR (designated Type B by SMPTE) is a reel-to-reel analog recording video tape format developed by the Bosch Fernseh division of Bosch in Germany in 1976. The magnetic tape format became the broadcasting standard in continental Europe, but adoption was limited in the United States and United Kingdom, where the Type C videotape VTR met with greater success.


== Details ==
The tape speed allowed 96 minutes on a large reel (later 120 minutes), and used 2 record/playback (R/P) heads on the drum rotating at 9000 RPM with a 190 degree wrap around a very small head drum, recording 52 video lines per head segment.  Video is recorded on an FM signal with a bandwidth of 5.5 MHz. Three longitudinal audio tracks are recorded on the tape as well: two audio and one Linear timecode (LTC) track. BCN 50 VTRs were used at the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow.The format required an optional, and costly, digital framestore in addition to the normal analog timebase corrector to do any "trick-play" operations, such as slow motion/variable-speed playback, frame step play, and visible shuttle functions. This was because, unlike 1 inch type C which recorded one field per helical scan track on the tape, Type B segmented each field to 5 or 6 tracks per field according to whether it was a 525 (NTSC) or 625 (PAL) line machine.The picture quality was excellent, and standard R/P machines, digital frame store machines, reel-to-reel portables, random access cart machines (for playback of short-form video material such as television commercials), and portable cart versions were marketed.Echo Science Corporation, a United States company, made units like a BCN 1 for the U.S. military for a short time in the 1970s. Echo Science models were Pilot 1, Echo 460, Pilot 260.


== Models introduced ==
BCR (BCR 40, BCR 50 and BCR 60)was a pre BCN VTR, made with Philips, the large scanner made it not useful,
BCN40  (1976, record unit with no TBC playback)
BCN50  (1976, recorder with TBC playback)
BCN20  (1976, one hour, portable with no TBC playback)
BCWQ   ("L" Unit for BCN20/21, added TBC playback to the portable units)
Effects control option for digital framestore, for freeze frame, quad split and mirror effects (early digital Special effects).
BNC51  (recorder with TBC playback, optional Slow motion and visible shuttle)
BCN5   (26½ pound, portable cart recorder, 40 min.)
BCN100 (random access 32 multicassette machine, up to 16 hours rec/playback-20 min per tape) Each unit had 3 tape desks with a 21 sec load time each cart. For on air palyback and 3 deck editing system
BCN52  (recorder with Digital TBC playback, with slow motion & visible shuttle)
BCN21  (lightweight reel to reel portable with no TBC playback, first Composite material VTR)
BCN53  (recorder with Digital TBC playback, with slow motion & visible shuttle)
HR-400 : RCA also sold the BCN50 as an HR-400.


== Special BCN units ==
Ruxton Video in Burbank (1970–1980s) used modified BCNs for 24 Frame playback to TVs used on movie studio sets. Thus the TVs had no flicker when seen on film, due to the film-compatible frame rate. Bill Hogan of Ruxton Ltd received in 1981 an Academy Award for Technical Achievement for his 24frame TV  work.
Image Transform in Universal City, co-founded by Ken Holland, in 1970, used specially modified BCNs to record 24-frame video also, but for their "Image Vision" system. The BCN would record and play back 24-frame video at 10 MHz bandwidth, with twice the standard 525-line NTSC resolution. To record this the headwheel and capstan ran at twice normal speed. Modified 24 frame/s 10 MHz Bosch Fernseh KCK-40 professional video cameras were used on the set. This was a custom pre-HDTV video system. This Image Vision recording could then be recorded to film on a modified 3M Electron Beam film recorder (EBR). Image Transform had modified other gear for this process. At its peak, this system was used to make "Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl" in 1982. This was the first major use of early electronic cinema technology (using wideband high-resolution analog video technology, predating IT-based DI (digital intermediate) post production for film nowadays) using a film recorder for Film out. Electronovision was also a pre-process like Image Vision. Merlin Engineering also worked on the BCN's wide bandwidth, 10 MHz, BCN modification.
Bell and Howell (later Rank Video Services) used special BCNs for mass VHS duplication. These specially-modified BCN VTRs could play back movies at two times the normal speed. In addition, the sync signals were also were at two times speed as well.  For proper playback, the headwheel and capstan also ran at twice normal speed. Specially modified VHS recorders could record this video. In doing this, the duplication plant could output twice the product than normal videocassette duplicating systems.Bell and Howell's Data Tape division in Pasadena, California modified BCNs to record high speed data for instrumentation purposes. These instrumentation recordings were mostly used by US government agencies, such as for NASA on the Space Shuttle. This unit could record data from up to 800 sensors.
Because of the small scanner, BCNs could record even at high g-forces. Hand picked BCN20 VTRs could record at low temperatures, down to -40 °C (-40 °F). This was done at the Olympic Winter Games in Lake Placid (1980) and in Sarajevo (1984).
Some users modified BCNs to fit 2-hour reels of tape on the BCN, so complete 2-hour movies could fit on one reel of tape. Bosch later made this a factory option, and was designated as BCN LP.
Bosch also offered SLP BCN, a "long-play" variant of the format.  It moved the tape at 1/3 speed so that up to 6 hours could be recorded one reel. The unit has a special head wheel with azimuth head. This was mostly used for time zone tape delay by television networks. With a head wheel change and a switch the unit could be returned to normal play.
One of the first Digital SDTV VTRs was a non-production prototype BCN deck that could record and play back early type of CCIR 601 digital signals. These three Bosch VTRs paved the way for the later SMPTE D1 VTR standard. In 1985 and 1986 in a Rennes experimental digital studio in France, an experimental all-digital television center was made, it used the two all digital BCN units.
The BCH 1000 is an analog HDTV VTR that records and playbacks HD-MAC at 50 frames per second, each at a resolution of 2048×1152. The BCH 1000 was used in the 1992 Summer Olympic Games in Barcelona and 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville.
		
		
		
		


== Specifications ==
1 Inch open reel to reel analog video system.
Video scanner rotation 9600 rpm, a minute, 150 rps.
52 horizontal lines per head.
Video FM signal at a bandwidth of 5,5 MHz
Three analog audio tracks: 2 audio tracks and 1 linear timecode track, 0.8mm wide - 30 mils
One analog control track 0.4mm wide - 15 mils, built into video scanner head.
Magnetic tape coating on the outside of the videotape reel.
Studio reel 96 minutes, later 120 minutes
Portable reel 60 minutes
Cart reel 20 minutes (BCN5 - BCN100)
Video scanner wrap 190 deg.
Video scanner dia. 50.3mm,  2 inches
Video track length 3.1 inches, 80mm
Video track gap 40 um, 1.5 mils
Tape speed 24cm/sec - 9.5 ips.
Video head write speed: 24m /sec - 950 ips
Video track angle 14.3 deg.
Video track width 160 um - 6.3 mils
Two video record/play heads at 180 deg.  (rotary transformer)
Two video erase head for insert edits at 180 deg. (rotary transformer)


== Some BCN users ==
ABC-TV at MCF [1]
AME – Hollywood, California
Aquarius Theater –Hollywood, California
Astin Moore, Los Angeles, California; see John Astin
ATC–Buenos Aires, Argentina
Audio Plus Video – Los Angeles, California and Northvale, New York
Australian Film & Television School, Sydney (now Australian Film, Television & Radio School)
Bell and Howell, (Rank Video Services) – Oak Brook, Illinois
Bell and Howell Data Tape – Pasadena, California
Cinema Video Processors – Chicago, Illinois
Complete Post – Hollywood, California
Cossey Studios – Santa Cruz, California
Dash Motorcars – Santa Cruz, California
DC Video – current user – Burbank, California
Editel – Hollywood, California
Eesti Televisioon
Glendale Studios (Outpost Video) – Glendale, California
Image Transform – Universal City, California
KCPT – Kansas City, Missouri
KPAZ-TV – Phoenix, Arizona
KTBN-TV – Costa Mesa, California
KTBO-TV – Oklahoma, Oklahoma
KTBW-TV Tacoma, Washington
Laser Pacific – Hollywood, California
Leon Russell – Burbank, California and Tulsa, Oklahoma
4MC – Burbank, California
Measurement Analysis – Torrance, California
Merlin – Palo Alto, California
Modern Video Film – Hollywood, California
National Institutes of Health- Bethesda, Maryland
Oral Roberts University – Tulsa, Oklahoma
ORF-Austrian Broadcasting Corporation – Vienna, Austria
Premore (see Solo Cup Company) – Culver City, California
Ruxton – Burbank, California
Spin Physics – San Diego, California
Starfax  – Burbank, California
STW Channel 9 - Perth, Western Australia
Technicolor – Newberry Park, California
The Video Tape Company – North Hollywood, California
The Videography Studios – West Los Angeles, California
TV2 in Framersheim, Germany
VDI – Hollywood, California
Video Business – New York, New York
Video Pack – New York, New York
Video Tape Company – Burbank, California
Vidtronics – Hollywood, California
WHFT-TV – Pembroke Park, Florida
WTVY – Dothan, Alabama
WWWJ-CD –  Louisville, Kentucky
ZDF in Mainz, Germany


== See also ==
Ampex 2 inch helical VTR
D1
D6 HDTV VTR
Fernseh
1 inch type A videotape
1 inch type C videotape
VTR


== References ==


== External links ==
vtoldboys.com BCN Pictures
The history of television, 1942 to 2000, page 197,  By Albert Abramson [2]
DC Video BNC page, Current user
little-archives.net BCN Specs
youtube.com BCN studio demo
youtube.com BCN20 demo
youtube.com BCN 51 PAL studio demo
Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl on IMDb