Title: Kathryn Jean Lopez
Aspects: {'K-Lo'}

Kathryn Jean Lopez (born March 22, 1976) is an American conservative columnist who is nationally syndicated by the United Feature Syndicate. She is also the former editor and current editor-at-large of National Review Online. Her nickname on the website's group blog "The Corner" is "K-Lo," a wordplay based on "J-Lo," the popular nickname for Jennifer Lopez.


== Early life ==
Lopez grew up in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, attended the all-girls Dominican Academy in New York, and graduated from The Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C., where she studied philosophy and politics. Before joining National Review in New York, she worked at the Heritage Foundation on Capitol Hill.


== Career ==
Besides National Review and NRO, her work has appeared in The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Times, The Women's Quarterly, The National Catholic Register, Our Sunday Visitor, American Outlook, New York Press, and The Human Life Review, among other publications.
She writes often on bioethics, religion, feminism, abortion, education, politics. Of NRO's writers, she tends to be a proponent of pro-life, marriage and family issues from a Catholic perspective.  She also advocates strong leadership within the Church, and was a supporter of the election of Pope Benedict XVI.
She was a strong supporter of President George W. Bush's reelection bid in the 2004 Presidential election campaign. On the day of the election, when afternoon exit polls showed Bush losing, she relayed information from Bush campaign insiders that cast doubt on the poll methodology. Afterwards, she supported preventing Arlen Specter from replacing Orrin Hatch as head of the United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary during the period between the 2004 elections and the beginning of the new Senate term in January 2005. Later in 2005, Lopez criticized the Supreme Court nomination of Harriet Miers. She has taken positions against gender quotas, e.g., for university admissions. In 2006, she supported the unsuccessful re-election campaign of Rick Santorum to the United States Senate. She was also a vocal supporter of Mitt Romney's bid for the Republican presidential nomination in 2008.
Lopez has appeared on CNN, C-SPAN, the Fox News Channel, MSNBC, and Oxygen and is a frequent guest on radio and TV shows, including Hugh Hewitt's nationally syndicated program and Vatican Radio.


== Notes ==


== External links ==
"The Corner" blog
Lopez National Review Online columns
Appearances on C-SPAN