Title: Hariharan (director)
Aspects: {'K. Hariharan'}

Hariharan is a veteran Indian film director who has directed over 50 Malayalam films. His movies mainly revolve around the cultural and relational aspects of a typical Keralite society. His notable works include Pazhassi Raja, Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha, Sargam, Parinayam, Amrutham Gamaya and Nakhakshathangal, which won him national acclaim.


== Biography and career ==
Hariharan studied at St. Thomas College, Thrissur and Universal Arts College, Kozhikode. He entered the Malayalam film industry in 1965. His first film Ladies Hostel was released in 1973, following which a lot of films with Prem Nazir and Madhu were released. Babumon was one of his box office hit movies of the black and white era. In 1979 another blockbuster movie Sarapanjaram was released with Jayan and Sheela. He has directed more than 60 films, many of which were highly successful both commercially and critically. His movies have mostly explored the complexities of social issues and human relationships, set in the backdrop of Kerala's rich cultural heritage. His films such as Valarthumrugangal, Panchagni, Nakhakshathangal, Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha, Sargam, Parinayam and Ennu Swantham Janakikutty have entered the Indian Panorama of International Film Festival. He has also been honored with a Diploma by the Pyongyang Film Festival of North Korea for Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha. In 1993, Sargam won him the State Award for Best Director and also National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment. The film also received special honor at the Fukuoka and Swiss film festivals. His next film, Parinayam, won the National Film Award for Best Film on Other Social Issues and took part in about seven film festivals across the world. Ennu Swantham Janakikutty was the inaugural film at the Korean film festival (2000), and it also took part in the London film festival (2000).
Apart from these recognitions he has also won Filmfare and Ramu Kariat Awards for his works on multiple occasions. In 2009, he made Pazhassi Raja. It is based on the life of Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja, the first revolter against the British East India Company. It was written by M. T. Vasudevan Nair and produced by Gokulam Gopalan. Later in 2011, he announced another historical film titled Randamoozham with Mohanlal in the lead role and written by M. T. Vasudevan Nair, which was an adaptation of his novel of the same name. It was to be produced by Gokulam Gopalan, but the project was later shelved.Then Hariharan - M. T. Vasudevan Nair team joined hands with the young talented actor Indrajith. Titled Ezhamathe Varavu, the film includes Vineeth and Bhavana in other major roles.


== Filmography ==


== Awards ==
National Film Awards:

2010 - National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Malayalam - Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja
1995 - National Film Award for Best Film on Other Social Issues - Parinayam
1993 - National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment - SargamKerala State Film Awards:

2009 - Kerala State Film Award for Best Director - Pazhassi Raja
1994 - Kerala State Film Award for Best Film - Parinayam
1994 - Kerala State Film Award for Best Director - Parinayam
1992 - Kerala State Film Award for Best Director - Sargam
1989 - Kerala State Film Award for Best Film with Popular Appeal and Aesthetic Value - Oru Vadakkan Veeragadha
1979 - Kerala State Film Award for Best Film with Popular Appeal and Aesthetic Value - Idavazhiyile Poocha MindappoochaFilmfare Awards:

2009 - Best Director - Pazhassi Raja
1994 - Best Director - ParinayamOther awards

2012 - Prem Nazir Award


== References ==


== External links ==
Hariharan on IMDb
Official Website of Information and Public Relation Department of Kerala