Title: Die Schuldigkeit des ersten Gebots
Aspects: {'K35'}

Die Schuldigkeit des ersten Gebots (complete title in historical spelling: Die Schuldigkeit Des ersten und fürnehmsten Gebotes; The Obligation of the First and Foremost Commandment), K. 35, is a sacred musical play (geistliches Singspiel) composed by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart in 1767 when he was 11 years old. It is Mozart's first opera or, more specifically, sacred drama, as is suggested by the name. The libretto is now attributed to Ignatz Anton von Weiser, although Johann Adam Wieland or Jakob Anton Marianus Wimmer had been suggested earlier. (The title page of the libretto ascribes it only to "J.A.W.".) Only the first part of the opera was composed by Mozart; the second and third parts were contributed by Michael Haydn and Anton Cajetan Adlgasser respectively. However, these other two parts have not survived. Part 1 of the opera was first performed on March 12, 1767, in the Knight's Hall of the Palace of the Archbishop, the Salzburg Residenz. Part 2 was performed on March 19, and part 3 on March 26.


== Background and performance history ==
Mozart composed the work at age 11 with the help of his two teachers, Michael Haydn and Anton Cajetan Adlgasser. In Salzburg, dividing up a sacred singspiel between other composers was common. The libretto was written by Ignatz Anton von Weiser even though it was said that Johann Adam Wieland suggested the idea first and his name is written on the libretto. Mozart composed only the first part of the opera, and the others composed "part two" and "part three." However, these other two parts have not survived. The performances were predominantly in Salzburg in St. Peter's, in Cathedrals, on the Nonnberg, and in Residenz. The opera includes many recitatives for all of the characters, and each character sings one to three arias. The characters of the opera are two tenors: Christgeist and Christ (a Christian), and three sopranos: Barmherzigkeit, Gerechtigkeit, and Weltgeist. The opera does not have a chorus.
Part I of the opera was first performed on 12 March 1767 in the Knight's Hall of the Palace of the Archbishop, Salzburg. Part II was performed on 19 March, and Part III on 26 March.


== Roles ==


== Musical numbers ==
Sinfonia Allegro
Recitativo: Die löblich' und gerechte Bitte
No. 1 Aria: Mit Jammer muß ich schauen
Recitativo: So viele Seelen Fall
No. 2 Aria: Ein ergrimmter Löwe brüllet
Recitativo: Was glaubst du?
No. 3 Aria: Erwache, fauler Knecht
Recitativo: Er reget sich
Recitativo: Wie, wer erwecket mich?
No. 4 Aria: Hat der Schöpfer dieses Leben
Recitativo: Daß Träume Träume sind
No. 5 Aria: Jener Donnerworte Kraft
Recitativo: Ist dieses, o so zweifle nimmermehr
No. 6 Aria: Schildre einen Philosophen
Recitativo: Wen hör' ich nun hier in der Nähe
No. 7 Aria: Manches Übel
Recitativo: Er halt mich einem Kranken gleich
Recitativo: Hast du nunmehr erfahren
No. 8 Terzetto: Laßt mir eurer Gnade Schein


== See also ==
Oratorio
List of operas by Mozart
Classical music written in collaboration


== References ==


== External links ==

Die Schuldigkeit des ersten Gebots: Score and critical report (in German) in the Neue Mozart-Ausgabe
(in German) Libretto