Title: Prussian Blue (duo)
Aspects: {'L&L'}

Prussian Blue was an American white nationalist, Neo-Nazi pop duo formed of Lynx Vaughan Gaede and Lamb Lennon Gaede, fraternal twins born on June 30, 1992, in Bakersfield, California. The duo Prussian Blue was formed in early 2003 by their mother April Gaede, who now goes by April Harrington. The twins referred to the Holocaust as a myth and promoted Holocaust denial and their group was described as racist and white supremacist.Lynx and Lamb were about 14 when they decided to cease touring. In a 2011 interview with The Daily, a U.S. and Australian news app, the twins renounced their previous politics.


== History ==
In an interview with Vice Magazine, the twins stated, "Part of our heritage is German American. Also our eyes are blue, and Prussian Blue is just a really pretty color."  They also remarked, "there is also the discussion of the lack of 'Prussian Blue' coloring (Zyklon B residue) in the so-called gas chambers in the concentration camps. We think it might make people question some of the inaccuracies of the 'Holocaust' myth." This is a reference to claims made by many Holocaust deniers that the Holocaust either did not happen or had far fewer victims than generally believed.
Lynx and Lamb Gaede first performed together by singing at a white nationalist festival called "Eurofest" in 2001.  They began learning how to play instruments in 2002 (Lamb plays the guitar and Lynx plays the violin).  In the same year they appeared on a VH1 special called Inside Hate Rock.  In 2003, they were featured in a Louis Theroux BBC documentary, entitled Louis and the Nazis, on racism and white supremacy in the United States.  Lamb, Lynx, and their mother, April Gaede, also appeared in the low-budget 2003 horror film Dark Walker.The twins recorded and released a debut CD at the end of 2004 called Fragment of the Future (Resistance Records) which had both acoustic folk-rock and bubblegum-pop sounds.  A year later, they recorded their second album, The Path We Chose, which has a more traditional rock sound including both acoustic and electric guitar.  Most of the songs on the second album lack the racial and white supremacist overtones of Fragment of the Future and are about more mainstream subject matter, like boys, crushes, and dating. On October 20, 2005, Prussian Blue was featured in a critical segment on ABC's Primetime. A DVD, Blonde Hair Blue Eyes, featuring three music videos and some live performances, was released in 2005. The pair toured the United States in 2005. On August 22, 2006, they were again featured in a critical segment on ABC's Primetime.
The twins moved with their mother and stepfather, Mark Harrington, and their younger half-sister, Dresden, from Bakersfield to Kalispell in Montana, in 2006; in their mother's words, Bakersfield was "not white enough."  Some of their new neighbors did not welcome them; many city residents passed out flyers warning people of the family's views, and signs proclaiming "No Hate Here" appeared on some windows around the town.  Some of the people who passed out flyers received threatening letters from members of out-of-state white supremacist organizations.  The Montana Human Rights Network planned a rally in Kalispell to protest against the family's racist views.The twins toured Europe in the summer of 2007, performing at events for white nationalist organizations.  They also appeared as guests on The Political Cesspool.  But as of early 2009, the band's website and MySpace page no longer were operational.


== Ideology ==
The duo had strong ties to the National Vanguard organization, a "white nationalist" group formed by disaffected former members of the National Alliance.  Their ideology has been described as racist and white supremacist by mainstream media outlets.  The Daily Telegraph reported that, on stage, the twins executed Nazi salutes.According to ABC News, the girls were homeschooled by their mother, April Gaede, an activist and writer for the white nationalist organization National Vanguard.  The twins' maternal grandfather, who lives in Squaw Valley, Fresno County, California, wears a Nazi swastika belt buckle; he also features the swastika on his truck and has registered it as a cattle brand.  During their ABC interview, the twins said they believed that Adolf Hitler was a great man with good ideas, and they described the Holocaust as being exaggerated.  They have also been criticized for stipulating that goods they donated to Hurricane Katrina victims should go only to white people: "After a day of trying, the supplies ended up with few takers, dumped at a local shop that sells Confederate memorabilia."A 2011 profile in The Daily describes the twins' rejection of some of their previous politics:

But after enrolling in public school and moving to Montana — a predominantly white state, albeit one with a decidedly hippie-ish vibe — Lamb and Lynx decided they simply no longer believed what they'd been taught. ..."I'm glad we were in the band," Lynx said, "but I think we should have been pushed toward something a little more mainstream and easier for us to handle than being front-men for a belief system that we didn't even completely understand at that time. We were little kids.
Despite this, they still made statements that were skeptical about elements of the Holocaust.


== Lyrics and influences ==
About half of the songs on Prussian Blue's first album are covers of other songs put out by other white pride bands with one (Lamb Near the Lane) co-written by David Lane and a few of the others by Ian Stuart Donaldson and Ken McLellan. One of their infamous cover songs, "Victory Day", was a covered song from the racist band RAHOWA.  Two of Prussian Blue's songs on their first album are dedicated to famous German Nazi and white nationalist activists, including Rudolf Hess and Robert Jay Mathews.  One of those songs, dedicated to Donaldson, Mathews, Hess, and William L. Pierce, which was written by Lamb, is "Sacrifice".Another song, "Gone With the Breeze," is dedicated to Mathews.  The cover songs on their album invoke ideas like Valhalla and Vinland, taken from Norse mythology and sagas.  Several songs, including "Victory Day," refer to a holy war waged under the banner of Creativity.
The lyrics to their song "The Stranger" are taken from a Rudyard Kipling poem of the same name.
Prussian Blue also released a cover of a song called "Ocean of Warriors" in mp3 format, dedicated to white participants in the 2005 Sydney, Australia race rioting.In 2006, a compilation album was released through the far right National Democratic Party of Germany (NPD) titled For The Fatherland.


== Media ==
Prussian Blue appeared in two British television documentaries.  The first, 2003's Louis and the Nazis by documentary maker Louis Theroux, was an account of white nationalists, including Prussian Blue.  The second, Nazi Pop Twins, by James Quinn, was first aired in 2007.  This documentary stressed the tension that existed between the twins and their mother, April.  In this documentary, Lynx and Lamb disavowed their mother's race-related views and said that they want to perform music that was not focused on race.  Lynx told Quinn that they wore the infamous T-shirts bearing a smiley face that resembled Adolf Hitler because she believed they "were a joke" and said that "being proud of being white" did not mean she was a racist.  Louis Theroux revisited the twins and their mother to collect material for his book Call of the Weird.


== End of white nationalist politics ==
A 2012 article in the UK newspaper The Daily Mirror reported that the girls hold more liberal views than the politics they promoted through their music in their early teens. The twins support the legalization of marijuana. While the article characterized them as "laid-back liberals celebrating the joys of ethnic diversity" and speculates if the twins' use of marijuana was part of their change of politics from white nationalism to apolitical whereas a blog belonging to one of the girls says the changes are not due to any usage of cannabis.


== Discography ==


=== Albums ===
Fragment of the Future (2004)
The Path We Chose (2005)
For the Fatherland (compilation, 2006)


=== Singles ===
"Your Daddy"
"Keepers of the Light" (Battlecry featuring Prussian Blue)
"Stand Up"
"I Will Bleed for You"


== References ==


== External links ==
Lynx Gaede on IMDb
Prussian Blue Official Website (defunct) from Archive.org
Prussian Blue at AllMusic  at Allmusic
April Gaede on IMDb
Lamb Gaede on IMDb


=== Articles ===
"Change of heart: Former Nazi teeny boppers are singing a new tune"
Nazi Pop Twins at Ourmedia (documentary on Prussian Blue, in streaming Flash format)
Southern Poverty Law Center on Prussian Blue
Anti-Defamation League article
Tiny Mix Tapes parody article
NYU Journalism report on Teen People's decision not to feature Prussian Blue
ABC News article
New York Daily News article
Daily Telegraph article
MP3 of a call to Inga Barks Show on KERN Newstalk 1410(Bakersfield) from Lamb Gaede
Interview with Vice Magazine on viceland.com
Lamb And Lynx Gaede: The Children Of Hate