Title: Cummins
Aspects: {'N14'}

Cummins is an American Fortune 500 corporation that designs, manufactures, and distributes engines, filtration, and power generation products. Cummins also services engines and related equipment, including fuel systems, controls, air handling, filtration, emission control, electrical power generation systems, and trucks. Headquartered in Columbus, Indiana, United States, Cummins sells in approximately 190 countries and territories through a network of more than 600 company-owned and independent distributors and approximately 6,000 dealers. Cummins reported net income of $2.19 billion on sales of $23.77 billion in 2018.


== History ==

The Cummins Engine Company was founded in Columbus, Indiana, in 1919 by William Glanton Irwin and Clessie Cummins, a local mechanic.  It focused on developing the diesel engine invented 20 years earlier, but in spite of several well publicized endurance trials, it was not until 1933 that their Model H, used in small railroad switchers, proved successful. Cummins N Series engines became the industry leader in the post-World War II road building boom in the United States, with more than half the heavy duty truck market from 1952 to 1959. In the 1960s, the company opened an assembly plant in Shotts, Scotland (closed in 1996). By 2013, Cummins had operations in 197 countries and territories.


== Business units ==


=== Cummins Engine Business ===
Cummins Engine Business Unit consists of Aftermarket support, Mid-Range, Heavy-Duty, and High-Power Engines. Cummins manufactures and markets a complete line of diesel and natural gas-powered engines for on-highway and off-highway use.  Its markets include heavy-and medium-duty truck, bus, recreational vehicle (RV), light-duty automotive and a number of industrial uses including, construction, mining, marine, oil and gas, railroad and military equipment.For the general public, the most visible Cummins product may be the 5.9-liter in-line six-cylinder engine used in the Dodge Ram light duty pickups starting in 1988.5. In 2007.5, a 6.7-liter version of the Cummins straight six engine became optional on the RAM pickup. In 2008, Cummins was a named defendant in a class action suit related to 1998-2001 model year Chrysler Dodge Ram trucks, model 2500 or 3500, originally equipped with a Cummins ISB 5.9 liter diesel engine built using a pattern 53 Block. The case has been settled, but some qualified Chrysler owners may receive $500 for repairs to the block, which was alleged to crack and create a coolant leak.
In April 2013, Cummins utilized technology developed by Westport Innovations to begin shipping large natural gas fueled engines to truck manufacturers in the United States as trucking companies began converting portions of their fleets to natural gas and the natural gas distribution network in the United States began to expand.Cummins has a Technical Centre in Darlington UK, where it develops products for the European, Middle Eastern and Asian markets.


=== Cummins Power Systems Business (formerly Cummins Power Generation) ===

Cummins Power Systems Business Unit consists of Alternators, Automatic Transfer Switches, Commercial Power Systems, Consumer Systems, Engines, and Paralleling Systems. Cummins Power Systems is a global provider of power generation systems, components and services in standby power, distributed power generation, as well as auxiliary power in mobile applications.
All of the above solutions stem from Cummins Onan, of which products are still in service today.
This Business Unit was formed recently, following a merge of the Power Generation Unit and High Horsepower Sub-Division.

On August 22, 2017, United Rentals announced it had acquired all mobile power generation assets from Cummins. To maintain fleet and customer service continuity, a small number of Cummins employees joined United Rentals.


=== Cummins Component Business ===
Cummins Component Business Unit consists of Emission Solutions, Filtration (Fleetguard), Fuel Systems, Turbo Technologies (Holset), and Electronics. With regards to Turbo Technologies, Cummins designs and manufactures turbochargers and related products, on a global scale, for diesel engines above 3 liters. In regard to Emission Solutions, Cummins develops and supplies catalytic exhaust systems and related products to the medium-and heavy-duty commercial diesel engine markets. In regard to Filtration, Cummins designs, manufactures and distributes heavy-duty and light-duty air, fuel, hydraulic and lube filtration, chemicals and exhaust system technology products for diesel and gas-powered equipment. With regards to Electronics, Cummins designs engine control units and sensors for Cummins diesel engines.


=== Cummins Distribution Business ===
Cummins Distribution Business consists of Engine and Power Generation Distribution as well as Service and Parts. The distribution unit of Cummins consists of 17 Cummins owned distributors and 10 joint ventures, covering 90 countries and territories through 234 locations.


== Subsidiaries ==


=== Cummins Turbo Technologies ===
The Holset Engineering Co.  was a British company that produced turbochargers, primarily for diesel and heavy duty applications.
In 1973 the company was purchased by Cummins after briefly being owned by the Hanson Trust. Holset now operates facilities in China, India, Brazil, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
In 2006, the division officially changed its name to Cummins Turbo Technologies to be identified more closely with its parent company. The turbocharger products still use the Holset brand name.


=== Cummins Power Systems ===
In 1990 Cummins began acquisition of Onan and completed it in 1992. Since then, Onan has evolved into Cummins Power Generation (now Cummins Power Systems), a wholly invested division of Cummins. The Onan name continues to be used for modern versions of their traditional engine-driven generators for RV, marine, commercial mobility, home standby, and portable use.
Fun Roads Website and Facebook page will also be rebranded to Cummins RV.
Cummins Inc. (NYSE: CMI) announced that it will be unifying its brand strategy across its Power Systems business segment, which provides high-speed engines from 760 – 4400hp and power generation equipment from 2-3,500kW, including standby and prime power gen sets, alternators, switchgear and other components. Currently the portfolio features the Cummins, Cummins Power Generation and Cummins Onan brands. With immediate effect, the branding will be consolidated under the Cummins brand. The Cummins Power Generation and Cummins Onan brands will be retired and the Onan name synonymous with mobile gensets, will be repositioned as a generator product line under the newly unified Cummins brand in the RV market.
Cummins Inc. will also be permanently changing all “Fun Roads” branding to Cummins RV moving forward as well and the Fun Roads brand will also be retired. As Onan will now be repositioned as a RV product line, with the new rv.cummins.com website and social media platforms serving as tools for RVers across the country to find relevant information like product specs and our sales and service locator.
“Looking to unify Cummins into one cohesive, unified brand, we decided that consolidating both products (engines and generators) into the Cummins RV family only strengthens the brand and more uniformly speaks to our manufacturers and consumers,” said Jodie Wilson. “The brand changing will not affect product or service offerings, but will help us to continue on our promise of delivering dependability across the globe.”
Rebranding will take place today globally on all marketing activities, as product branding changes across all manufacturing plants this July.


=== Cummins Emission Solutions ===
Exhaust and emissions after-treatment company Nelson Industries was purchased in 1999, due to the increasing importance of exhaust after-treatment systems for meeting future emissions standards. The division officially changed its name to Cummins Emission Solutions, in order to be identified more closely with their parent company.


== China operations ==
Cummins has some joint ventures with Chinese manufacturer, such as Dongfeng Cummins, a joint venture with Dongfeng Automobile Company, as well as Guangxi Cummins Industrial Power with LiuGong.
Other entities were Cummins Beijing, Chongqing Cummins Engine, Xi’an Cummins Engine, Wuxi Newage Alternators, Xiangfan Fleetguard, Wuxi Cummins Turbo Technologies.


== India operations ==
Cummins began its India operations on 17 February 1962 in a joint venture with the Kirloskar Group. The ownership structure of the joint venture was divided as follows:

Cummins - 50%
Kirloskar Group - 25.5%
Retail Investors - 24.5%In 1996 Cummins Inc. bought Kirloskar shares. Now its Cummins Inc. subsidiary. 
As of 2013, the Cummins group had revenues of over $1.5 billion, 20 factories and 9000 employees in India.
Cummins does a significant part of its R&D in India at the Cummins Research and Technology centre that was set up in 2003. Also, Cummins is building an advanced technical centre in Pune which will house over 2000 engineers.Cummins India has also made significant contributions to local skill development by establishing the MKSSS's Cummins College of Engineering for Women, a women-only engineering college in Pune.


== Current products ==

IS (Interact Series) - family of engines used for on-highway applications, trucks, busses and RVs
ISF 2.8-liter I4 - used in GAZ GAZelle (Business and Next series) and Foton Tunland light trucks
ISV 5.0-liter V8 - used in the 2016 and newer Nissan Titan XD truck 
ISB 5.9-liter I6, 190 HP - used in first and second generation Ram 2500 and 3500 trucks until 2007
ISB 6.7-liter I6 - used in third and fourth generation Ram 2500-5500 trucks, medium duty trucks such as, Freightliner and International. Used in Kenworth and Peterbilt called the Paccar PX6 or PX7.
ISC 8.3-liter I6 - discontinued
ISL 8.9-liter - I6 - used for a variety of applications, and a very common engine for buses
ISL G 8.9-liter - I6 natural-gas-powered; used for a variety of applications
ISM 11-liter I6 - used for a variety of vocational applications in lesser regulated areas
ISG 12-liter I6 - used primarily in Chinese HD trucks
ISX 12-liter I6 - used in heavy-duty trucks
ISX G 12-liter I6 - natural-gas-powered; used in heavy-duty trucks
ISD 12.4-liter I6 - used in tractor applications in lesser regulated areas
ISX 15 liter I6 - used in heavy-duty trucks
V903 14.8-liter V8 - used in Bradley fighting vehicles and other military applications
QS (Quantum Series) - family of engines used for off-highway applications, such as marine, rail/industrial, construction, power generation and agriculture
QSF 2.8-liter I4
QSF 3.8-liter I4
QSB 4.5-liter I4
QSB 6.7-liter I6
QSL 9-liter I6
QSG 12-liter I6
QSX 15-liter I6
QSK 19-liter I6
QSK 23-liter I6
QST 30-liter V12
QSK 38-liter V12
QSK 45-liter V12
QSK 50-liter V16
QSK 60-liter V16
QSK 78-liter V18
QSK 95-liter V16X Series (Next-Generation) - evolution of IS engine family
X12
X15 Performance 15-liter I6
X15 Efficiency 15-liter I6


=== Commercial vehicles ===
Cummins Aeos - An electric-powered conventional truck.


== Clean Air Act violation ==
In 1998, the EPA announced fines totaling $83.4 million against Cummins and six other diesel engine manufacturers, the largest fine to date, for evading testing by deliberately deactivating emissions controls during highway driving, in order to give the appearance of being in full regulatory compliance during standard laboratory testing. The manufacturers also agreed to spend more than $1 billion to correct the problem. The trucks used engine ECU software to engage pollution controls during the 20-minute lab tests to verify compliance with the Clean Air Act, but then quietly disabled the emissions controls during normal highway cruising, thereby emitting up to three times the maximum allowed NOx pollution.


== See also ==

Tech Mahindra
Indian Railways
Tata Motors
Cummins Corporate Office Building
Cummins UK
Cummins-Wärtsilä
Komatsu
J. Irwin Miller
Central Japan Railway Company
Brammo


== References ==


== External links ==
Cummins Corporate Web Site
Business data for Cummins: