Title: Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye
Aspects: {'Na Na Na'}

"Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye" is a song written and recorded by Paul Leka, Gary DeCarlo and Dale Frashuer, attributed to a then-fictitious band they named "Steam". It was released under the Mercury subsidiary label Fontana and became a number one pop single on the Billboard Hot 100 in late 1969, and remained on the charts in early 1970.In 1977, Chicago White Sox organist Nancy Faust began playing the song when White Sox sluggers knocked one out of the park.  It later was adopted for throwing out the opposing pitcher. The fans would sing and a sports ritual was born. The song's chorus remains well-known, and is still frequently used as a crowd chant at many sporting events. It is generally directed at the losing side in an elimination contest when the outcome is all but certain or when an individual player is ejected or disqualified. It has also been sung by crowds in political rallies, to taunt political opponents or to drown out and mock disruptive counter-protesters.


== Original version ==
Paul Leka, Gary DeCarlo and Dale Frashuer wrote a blues shuffle version of the song in the early 1960s when they were members of a doo-wop group from Bridgeport, Connecticut, called the Glenwoods, the Citations, and the Chateaus, of which Leka was the piano player. The group disbanded when Leka talked Frashuer into going into New York City with him to write and possibly produce. In 1968, DeCarlo recorded four songs at Mercury Records in New York with Leka as producer. The singles impressed the company's executives, who wanted to issue all of them as A-side singles. In need of a B-side, Leka and DeCarlo resurrected an old song from their days as the Glenwoods, "Kiss Him Goodbye", with their old bandmate, Frashuer.
With DeCarlo as lead vocalist, they recorded the song in one recording session. Instead of using a full band, Leka played keyboards himself and had engineer Warren Dewey splice together a drum track from one of DeCarlo's four singles and a conga drum solo by Ange DiGeronimo recorded in Mr. Leka's Bridgeport, Conn. studio for an entirely different session. "I said we should put a chorus to it (to make it longer)", Leka told Fred Bronson in The Billboard Book of Number One Hits. "I started writing while I was sitting at the piano going 'na, na, na, na, na, na, na, na'... Everything was 'na na' when you didn't have a lyric." Gary added "hey hey". The group that is seen on the album cover and in the old black and white video was a road group that had nothing to do with the recording. The road group was lip syncing to DeCarlo's vocal in the video."Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye" reached number one in the United States for two weeks, on December 6 and 13, 1969; it was Billboard's final multi-week number 1 hit of the 1960s and also peaked at number twenty on the soul chart. In Canada, the song reached number six. By the beginning of the 21st century, sales of "Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye" had exceeded 6.5 million records, attaining gold record status.


== Bananarama version ==
In February 1983, UK girl group Bananarama released the song as a single from their album Deep Sea Skiving. This version became a top ten hit in the United Kingdom (#5), but only a minor hit in the US (Billboard #101) later that year. This was the fifth single released from their first album in 1983.
It peaked at number five in the UK singles chart, and number 38 in Australia on the Kent Music Report chart.


==== Track listing ====
UK & USA 7" vinyl singleUK: London Records NANA 4; USA: London Records 810 115-7

"Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye"  3:22
"Tell Tale Signs"  2:58UK 12" vinyl singleLondon Records NANX 4

"Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye" (Extended Version) 4:52
"Na Na Hey Hey Na (Dub) Hey"  4:12
"Tell Tale Signs" (Extended Version) 4:46


==== Music video ====
The music video features the band playing in a school playground and then being made to move by a group of lads. They then decide to join a boxing club so the video features them singing the song whilst boxing. By the end of the video they return to the playground wearing leathers and this time make the group of lads move away. They then ride off into the night on motorbikes.


== Chart history ==

Bananarama cover


== Other cover versions ==
The Supremes included a cover of the song on their 1970 album New Ways but Love Stays.
The Belmonts recorded an a cappella version, which can be found as a track on their 1972 album Cigars, Acappella, Candy.
Dave Clark & Friends released the song in October 1973 under the title "Sha-Na-Na-Na (Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye)" (EMI 2082), but the single did not chart.
In 1987, Canadian quartet The Nylons released an a cappella version of this song as a single under the shortened title "Kiss Him Goodbye". It became their biggest hit on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number twelve that summer.The Donna Summer compilation album Gold (a 1995 release exclusively for the Netherlands) contains a 3:42 disco cover of the song.
In 2014 the Norwegian artist Adelén used the chorus line of the song on her World Cup song "Olé."  The song was one of the tracks on the One Love, One Rhythm - The 2014 FIFA World Cup Official Album. The song peaked at number #3 in Norway.
The song "Chillin" by rapper Wale featuring singer Lady Gaga samples the chorus. It was also sampled in "Goodbye" by Kristinia DeBarge.
"Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye" bears a resemblance to the coda of The Beatles' 1968 song "Hey Jude".
The rap song "We Ready" by Archie Eversole featuring Bubba Sparxxx samples the song and has become a sports stadium anthem as well as being featured in nationally-run commercials.


== In popular culture ==
The song has been used several times on WWE in which it is sung by the crowd when a superstar/general manager is fired, from Jonathan Coachman to John Laurinaitis.
The song is typically sung by the crowd in NBA games, as a noteworthy opposing player is ejected due to personal, technical or flagrant fouls.
The MTV game show Remote Control featured the song as one of several songs the audience would sing as a player was eliminated.  (Audiences sometimes sang "Hit the Road Jack" instead.)
Since 2003, it has been used at cricket matches in England and Wales during the T20 Blast to celebrate wickets.
The song is sung A cappella by the crowd at ice hockey games in Canada (particularly in Montreal and Quebec City) at the end of games in order to say goodbye to the losing team.

On January 23, 2006, Paul Martin was defeated by Stephen Harper as Prime Minister of Canada.  Martin had acceded to the prime ministry following the ouster of Jean Chrétien.  The next day's issue of La Voix de l'Est, a French newspaper in Granby, Quebec, included a cartoon by Paquette showing Chrétien calling Martin and singing "Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye".
At the 2009 and 2017 Presidential Inaugurations, some audiences were chanting "Na na na na" to the departing Presidents, respectively George W. Bush and Barack Obama.On May 4, 2017, after the House of Representatives voted to pass the American Health Care Act which partially repealed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Democratic representatives chanted "Na na na na, hey hey, goodbye" to Republican representatives, implying that in voting for the bill, they would lose their House seats in the next election. DeCarlo was happy to hear of the song getting renewed exposure, but said he opposed Obamacare. It was not the first time the song had been sung in Congress; in 1993, after Democrats voted for then-President Bill Clinton's tax bill, House Republicans sang "Goodbye".
In January 2019, GMC launched an advertising campaign for its 2019 Sierra 1500 pickup truck, focusing on GMC's new MultiPro tailgate feature.  The commercial shows owners of competing pickups carrying tailgates from those trucks and singing "Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye" while heading to the top of a mountain.


== References ==


== External links ==
Lyrics of this song at MetroLyrics
Video on YouTube
Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye on theoriginals (nl)