Title: Neapolitan language
Aspects: {"O'"}

Neapolitan (autonym: (’o n)napulitano [(o n)napuliˈtɑːnə]; Italian: napoletano) is a Romance language of the Italo-Dalmatian group spoken across much of southern Italy, except for southern Calabria, southern Apulia, and Sicily, and spoken in a small part of central Italy (the province of Ascoli Piceno in the Marche). It is not named specifically after the city of Naples, but rather the homonymous Kingdom that once covered most of the area, and of which the city was the capital. On October 14, 2008, a law by the Region of Campania stated that Neapolitan was to be protected.While the term "Neapolitan language" is used in this article to refer to the language group of related dialects found in southern continental Italy, it may also refer more specifically to the dialect of the Neapolitan language spoken in the Naples area or in Campania. In fact, in a colloquial or non-academic or non-linguist context, “Neapolitan language”, napulitano, or napoletano generally refers specifically to the variety of the language spoken in Naples and the surrounding area; however, this variety is usually mutually intelligible with other related “Neapolitan language” varieties throughout Southern Italy.Neapolitan has had a significant influence on the intonation of Rioplatense Spanish, of the Buenos Aires region of Argentina, and the whole of Uruguay.


== Distribution ==

The Neapolitan dialects are distributed throughout most of continental southern Italy, historically united during the Kingdom of Naples and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, specifically southern Lazio (Gaeta and Sora districts), southern Marche, Abruzzo, Molise, Basilicata, Campania (Naples), northern and central Apulia, and northernmost Calabria. The dialects are part of a varied dialect continuum, so the varieties in southern Lazio, Marche, Abruzzo, Molise, Apulia, Lucania and Calabria can typically be recognizable as regional groups of dialects. In western Abruzzo and Lazio the dialects give way to Central Italian dialects such as Romanesco. In central Calabria and southern Apulia, the dialects give way to the Sicilian language. Largely due to massive southern Italian migration in the late 19th century and early 20th century, there are also numbers of speakers in Italian diaspora communities in the United States, Canada, Australia, Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela. However, in the United States traditional Neapolitan has had considerable contact with English, and is significantly different from contemporary Neapolitan spoken in Naples. English words are often used in place of Neapolitan words, especially among second-generation speakers. On the other hand, the effect on Neapolitan in Italy has been similar due to displacement by Standard Italian.
The following dialects constitute Neapolitan; numbers refer to the map:

The southernmost regions of Italy—most of Calabria and southern Apulia, as well as Sicily—are home to Sicilian rather than Neapolitan.


== Classification ==

Neapolitan is a Romance language and is generally considered one of the Italo-Romance branch of the Italo-Dalmatian languages. There are notable differences among the various dialects, but they are all generally mutually intelligible.
Italian and Neapolitan are of variable mutual comprehensibility, depending on factors that are both affective and linguistic. There are notable grammatical differences, such as Neapolitan having nouns in the neuter form and a unique plural formation as well as historical phonological developments, which often obscure the cognacy of lexical items.
Its evolution has been similar to that of Italian and other Romance languages from their roots in Vulgar Latin. It may reflect a pre-Latin Oscan substratum, as in the pronunciation of the d sound as an r sound (rhotacism) at the beginning of a word or between two vowels: e.g. doje (feminine) or duje (masculine), meaning "two", is pronounced, and often spelled, as roje/ruje; vedé ("to see") as veré, and often spelled so; also cadé/caré ("to fall") and Madonna/Maronna). Another purported Oscan influence is the historical assimilation of the consonant cluster /nd/ as /nn/, pronounced [nː] (this is generally reflected in spelling more consistently: munno vs Italian mondo "world"; quanno vs 
Italian quando "when"), along with the development of /mb/ as /mm/~[mː] (tammuro vs Italian tamburo "drum"), also consistently reflected in spelling. Other effects of the Oscan substratum are postulated, but substratum claims are highly controversial. As in many other languages in the Italian Peninsula, Neapolitan has a adstratum greatly influenced by other Romance languages (Catalan, Spanish and Franco-Provençal above all), Germanic languages, Greek (both ancient and modern) and Arabic. The language had never been standardised, and the word for tree has three different spellings: arbero, arvero and àvaro.
Neapolitan has enjoyed a rich literary, musical and theatrical history (notably Giambattista Basile, Eduardo De Filippo, Salvatore Di Giacomo and Totò). Thanks to this heritage and the musical work of Renato Carosone in the 1950s, Neapolitan is still in use in popular music, even gaining national popularity in the songs of Pino Daniele and the Nuova Compagnia di Canto Popolare.
The language has no official status within Italy and is not taught in schools. The University of Naples Federico II offers (from 2003) courses in Campanian Dialectology at the faculty of Sociology, whose actual aim is not teaching students to speak the language, but studying its history, usage, literature and social role. There are also ongoing legislative attempts at the national level to have it recognized as an official minority language of Italy. It is however a recognized ISO 639 Joint Advisory Committee language with the language code of nap.
Here is the IPA pronunciation of the Neapolitan spoken in the city of Naples:


== Alphabet and pronunciation ==
Neapolitan orthography consists of 22 Latin letters. Much like Italian orthography, it does not contain k, w, x, or y even though these letters might be found in some foreign words; like traditional Italian, it does contain the letter j. The English pronunciation guidelines that follow are based on General American pronunciation and the values used may not be applicable to other dialects. (See also: International Phonetic Alphabet chart for English dialects.)
All Romance languages are closely related. Although Neapolitan shares a high degree of its vocabulary with Italian, the official language of Italy, differences in pronunciation often make the connection unrecognizable to those without knowledge of Neapolitan. The most striking phonological difference is the Neapolitan weakening of unstressed vowels into schwa (schwa is pronounced like the a in about or the u in upon). However it is also possible (and quite common for some Neapolitans) to speak standard Italian with a "Neapolitan accent"; that is, by pronouncing un-stressed vowels as schwa but by otherwise using only entirely standard words and grammatical forms. This is not Neapolitan proper, but a mere difference in Italian pronunciation.
Therefore, while pronunciation presents the strongest barrier to comprehension, the grammar of Neapolitan is what sets it apart from Italian. In Neapolitan, for example, the gender and number of a word is expressed by a change in the accented vowel, whereas in Italian it is expressed by a change in the final vowel (e.g. luongo [ˈlwoŋɡə], longa [ˈloŋɡə]; Italian lungo, lunga; masc. "long", fem. "long"). These and other morpho-syntactic differences distinguish the Neapolitan language from the Italian language and the Neapolitan accent.


=== Vowels ===
While there are only five graphic vowels in Neapolitan, phonemically, there are eight.  Stressed vowels e and o can be either "closed" or "open" and the pronunciation is different for the two.  The grave accent (à, è, ò) is used to denote open vowels, and the acute accent (é, í, ó, ú) is used to denote closed vowels, with alternative ì and ù.  However, accent marks are not commonly used in the actual spelling of words except when they occur on the final syllable of a word, such as Totò, arrivà, or pecché and when they appear here in other positions it is only to demonstrate where the stress, or accent, falls in some words. Also, the circumflex is used to mark a long vowel where it wouldn't normally occur (e.g. sî "you are").


=== Consonants ===


=== Digraphs and trigraphs ===
The following clusters are always geminated if vowel-following.


== Grammar ==


=== Definite articles ===
The Neapolitan classical definite articles (corresponding to the English word "the") are la (feminine singular), lo (masculine singular) and li (plural for both), but in reality these forms will probably only be found in older literature (along with lu and even el), of which there is much to be found.  Modern Neapolitan uses, almost entirely, shortened forms of these articles which are:
Before a word beginning with a consonant:

These definite articles are always pronounced distinctly.
Before a word beginning with a vowel, l’ or ll’ are used 
for both masculine and feminine, for both singular and plural. Although both forms can be found, the ll’ form is by far the most common.
It is well to note that in Neapolitan the gender of a noun is not easily determined by the article, so other means must be used.  In the case of ’o which can be either masculine singular or neuter singular (there is no neuter plural in Neapolitan), when it is neuter the initial consonant of the noun is doubled.  As an example, the name of a language in Neapolitan is always neuter, so if we see ’o nnapulitano we know it refers to the Neapolitan language, whereas ’o napulitano would refer to a Neapolitan man.
Likewise, since ’e can be either masculine plural or feminine plural, when it is feminine plural, the initial consonant of the noun is doubled.  As an example, consider ’a lista which in Neapolitan is feminine singular for "list."  In the plural it becomes ’e lliste.
There can also be problems with nouns whose singular form ends in e.  Since plural nouns usually end in e whether masculine or feminine, the masculine plural is often formed by orthographically changing the spelling.  As an example, consider the word guaglione (which means "boy", or "girl" in the feminine form):

More will be said about these orthographically changing nouns in the section on Neapolitan nouns.
A couple of notes about consonant doubling:

Doubling is a function of the article (and certain other words), and these same words may be seen in other contexts without the consonant doubled.  More will be said about this in the section on consonant doubling.
Doubling only occurs when the consonant is followed by a vowel.  If it is followed by another consonant, such as in the word spagnuolo (Spanish), no doubling occurs.


=== Indefinite articles ===
The Neapolitan indefinite articles, corresponding to the English a or an, are presented in the following table:


=== Verbal conjugation ===
In Neapolitan there are four finite moods: indicative, subjunctive, conditional and imperative, and three non-finite modes: infinitive, gerund and participle. Each mood has an active and a passive form. The only auxiliary verbs used in the active form is (h)avé (Eng. "to have", It. avere), which contrasts with Italian in which the intransitive and reflexive verbs take èssere for their auxiliary. For example, we have:


=== Doubled initial consonants ===
In Neapolitan, many times the initial consonant of a word is doubled.  This is called raddoppiamento sintattico in Italian as it also applies to the Italian phonology.

All feminine plural nouns, when preceded by the feminine plural definite article, ’e, or by any feminine plural adjective, have their initial consonant doubled.
All neuter singular nouns, when preceded by the neuter singular definite article, ’o, or by a neuter singular adjective, have their initial consonant doubled.
In addition, other words also trigger this doubling. Below is a list of words that trigger the doubling of the initial consonant of the word that follows.However, when there is a pause after the "trigger" word, the phonological doubling does not occur (e.g. tu sî (g)guaglione, [You are a boy], where sî is a "trigger" word causing doubling of the initial consonant in guaglione but in the phrase ’e do sî, guaglió? [Where are you from, boy?] no doubling occurs). Neither does doubling occur when the initial consonant is followed by another consonant (e.g. ’o ttaliano [the Italian language], but ’o spagnuolo [the Spanish language], where ’o is the neuter definite article).
This is what happens phonologically and no orthographic change is required. The same thing happens in Italian, where multiple words trigger first-consonant doubling, e.g. la casa but a (c)casa, io e (t)te, etc.  


==== Words that trigger doubling in pronunciation ====
The conjunctions e and né but not o (e.g. pane e ccaso; né (p)pane né (c)caso; but pane o caso)
The prepositions a, pe, cu (e.g. a (m)me; pe (t)te; cu (v)vuje)
The negation nu, short for nun (e.g. nu ddicere niente)
The indefinites ogne, cocche (e.g. ogne (c)casa; cocche (c)cosa)
Interrogative che and relative che but not ca (e.g. che (p)piense? che (f)femmena! che (c)capa!)
accussí (e.g. accussí (b)bello)
From the verb "essere," so’; sî; è but not songo (e.g. je so’ (p)pazzo; tu sî (f)fesso; chella è (M)Maria; chilli so’ (c)cafune but chilli songo cafune)
chiú (e.g. chiú (p)poco)
The number tre (e.g. tre (s)segge)
The neuter definite article ’o (e.g. ’o (p)pane, but nu poco ’e pane)
The neuter pronoun ’o (e.g. ’o (t)tiene ’o (p)pane?)
Demonstrative adjectives chistu and chillu which refer to neuter nouns in indefinite quantities (e.g. chistu (f)fierro; chillu (p)pane) but not in definite quantities (e.g. Chistu fierro; chillu pane)
The feminine plural definite article ’e (e.g. ’e (s)segge; ’e (g)guaglione)
The plural feminine pronoun ’e (’e (g)guaglione ’e (c)chiamme tu?)
The plural masculine pronoun ’e preceding a verb, but not a noun (’e guagliune ’e (c)chiamme tu?)
The locative lloco (e.g. lloco (s)sotto)
From the verb stà: sto’ (e.g. sto’ (p)parlanno)
From the verb puté: può; pô (e.g. isso pô (s)sapé)
Special case Spiritu (S)Santo


== See also ==

Languages of Italy
Sicilian language
Languages of Calabria


== References ==


== Additional sources ==
Iandolo, Carlo. A lengua ’e Pulecenella, Di Mauro Franco, Italy; 1 Oct 2001; ISBN 978-8885263710 (in Italian)
De Blasi, Nicola and Luigi Imperatore. Il napoletano parlato e scritto. Con note di grammatica storica ; Dante & Descartes, Italy;  2nd edition, 1 July 2001; ISBN 978-8888142050 (in Italian)
http://termcoord.eu/2014/07/neapolitan-great-cultural-heritage/Verde, Massimiliano.First Course of Neapolitan Language according to the QCER CEFR with the Patronage of City of Naples realized by Dr.Massimiliano Verde "Corso di Lingua e Cultura Napoletana" with a document of study in Neapolitan Language by Dr.Verde *http://www.napolitoday.it/eventi/consegnato-primo-certificato-europeo-lingua-napoletana.html; First public document in Neapolitan Language of the XXI century according to a text of Dr.Verde; the touristic Map of the III Municipality of Naples in Neapolitan Language  *https://grandenapoli.it/napoli-arriva-la-mappa-turistica-info-napoletano-italiano/ *https://www.vesuviolive.it/ultime-notizie/202855-napoli-nasce-la-mappa-turistica-info-italiano-napoletano/


== External links ==

Neapolitan recognized by UNESCO (in Italian)
Websters Online Dictionary Neapolitan–English
Interactive Map of languages in Italy
Neapolitan on-line radio station
Neapolitan glossary on Wiktionary
Italian-Neapolitan searchable online dictionary
Neapolitan basic lexicon at the Global Lexicostatistical Database
Grammar primer and extensive vocabulary for the Neapolitan dialect of Torre del Greco
Neapolitan language and culture (in Italian)
Prosodic detail in Neapolitan Italian. By Francesco Cangemi. Berlin: Language Science Press. 187pp. Free download
[1]