Title: 3Arena
Aspects: {'O2 Arena'}

The 3Arena (originally The Point Depot) is an indoor amphitheatre located at North Wall Quay in the Dublin Docklands in Dublin, Ireland. The venue opened as The O2 on 16 December 2008. It was built on the site of the former Point Theatre, a smaller music venue which operated from 1988 to 2007, retaining only some of the outer facade. The Point Theatre was branded as "The Point Depot", in recognition of its original role as a railway goods handling station. The venue was re-branded on 4 September 2014 due to the takeover of O2 Ireland by Three Ireland.
The venue is owned by a Live Nation subsidiary, Apollo Leisure Group Ltd. The venue is among the top ten busiest music arenas in the world.


== Naming ==
Following its closure in 2007, the site underwent major redevelopment and was renamed The O2 after the telecommunication brand, O2, similar to The O2 in London. In 2008, O2 paid €25 million for the naming rights for 10 years. Following the sale of mobile network operator O2 Ireland to rival 3 Ireland in June 2014, the venue was renamed as the 3Arena on 4 September 2014.


== Structure and design ==
The furthest seat is 60 metres from the stage, 20 metres closer than in The Point. This was achieved by arranging the seats around the stage in a gigantic "fan" formation which the architects likened to the Colosseum of Rome. There are no corporate boxes inside the venue. The backstage area has a "substantial" loading bay for trucks. Alcohol is available in a high-security area of the venue in an effort to curb under-age drinking. Prior to re-development, the seating capacity was 6,300 or 8,500 standing.
Mike Adamson (CEO of Live Nation Ireland) claimed that Irish fans had been short-changed when attending major events in the previous venue due to size restrictions. "It wasn't always possible to get every show touring in Europe into the venue because of restrictions. It is now. Some shows couldn't fit. For example, George Michael could only stage three-quarters of his production in the Point. We're up there now with other venues in Europe." Developer Harry Crosbie said that the Point had had a "grungy" feel "which suited Dublin at the time". He claimed that it would be a "stunning venue" created for a more "sophisticated" audience.


== Attendance ==
In 2011, the venue was named as the fifth busiest music arena in the world with ticket sales of 670,000 putting it behind The O2 Arena in London, the Manchester Arena, Antwerp's Sportpaleis and Melbourne's Rod Laver Arena. In 2012 it rose to 4th place, and in 2013 it dropped to 9th place.


== Notable/historic performances ==

U2 were the first band to play in the venue, when Bono and The Edge performed "Van Diemen's Land" and "Desire" to a private audience.The first event to take place at the arena was the ChildLine Concert on 16 December 2008.There was a controversial Guns N' Roses show in September 2010 during which the band had arrived a substantial amount of time late then had bottles hurled at them and stopped performing. Most of the audience then left the building in disgust, but the band later returned to finish the show. The band returned in 2012 and only achieved 47% capacity at the show.Rammstein performed their first ever show in Ireland at the arena on 27 February 2012 as part of their Made in Germany 1995-2011 Tour.
Since March 2014, the arena has hosted the C2C: Country to Country festival and is the second longest-running host venue after the O2 Arena in London.
U2 performed four homecoming concerts in November 2015, as part of their Innocence + Experience Tour. The full U2 stage setup could not be brought to the 3Arena due the venue's configuration as an amphitheatre. The U2 stage was designed for a full indoor arena, but was reconfigured for the concerts in the 3Arena.Britney Spears brought her Piece of Me Tour on 20 August 2018. Additionally, tickets for the show sold out within 10 minutes of its availability.On 22 May 2019, Mariah Carey took to the arena stage in her first ever show in Ireland, as part of her Caution World Tour.Christina Aguilera performed on the arena during her The X Tour (2019).


== Transport ==
Patrons are advised to use public transport to get to the venue. Parking services for the nearby Point Village are suggested. In addition to the ferry services and shuttle buses noted on the venue's web site, Dublin Bus number 151 provides a scheduled public service to the venue.
Due to the high volume of pedestrian traffic leaving the venue after concerts, extensive traffic restrictions are put in place along the North Wall Quay after such events, which can cause both the North Wall Quay and the East-Link (Dublin) toll bridge to be restricted for vehicular traffic by the Gardaí.
A Luas light rail extension from the Red Line to the back of the venue opened on 8 December 2009, and links the DART train services at Connolly Station to the venue. It coincided with a performance by Lily Allen. The Luas stop is called The Point.
Those travelling to the 3Arena from Dublin Airport can avail of either the public Dublin Bus route 747, or the Greystones or Dalkey Aircoach services that stop outside the venue, while several other private operators also call at the venue.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Hot Press on site at The O2
RTÉ report on the venue's opening
State Magazine photos of early shows: Kings of Leon Coldplay