Title: Oak Flat (Arizona)
Aspects: {'Oak Flat'}

Oak Flat is a controversial area of land that is held as sacred by Native Americans from the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation. Oak Flat has been subject to attempts by the federal government to sell it to mining interests, against the wishes of the tribe.


== Mine controversy ==
In December 2014, President Barack Obama signed the 2015 National Defense Authorization Act, which would give land sacred to the Apache in Arizona to Resolution Copper Mine [RCM], a joint venture owned by Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton. The Act cleared the way for the land swap in which Resolution Copper would receive 2,422 acres of National Forest land in exchange for deeding to the federal government 5,344 acres of private land.A proposal or rider in Section 3003 of the Act, titled "Southeast Arizona Land Exchange and Conservation Act", would allow RCM to develop and operate an underground copper mine 7,000-feet deep (approximately five Empire State buildings) in the publicly owned Tonto National Forest near Superior, Arizona.  The mine would destroy an area set aside in 1955 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower that is sacred to the San Carlos Apache.  The land contains more than 2,400 acres of the Oak Flat Campground, an area dotted with petroglyphs and historic and prehistoric sites.  Said former San Carlos Apache tribal chairman Wendsler Nosie Sr. of the Act's attached rider: “This is Congressional politics at its worse, a hidden agenda that destroys human rights and religious rights."

The San Carlos Apache Tribe, under the leadership of Chairman Terry Rambler, has led a strong opposition to the RCM land exchange. Both the National Audubon Society in Tucson and the Grand Canyon Chapter of the Sierra Club in Arizona along with the National Congress of American Indians have joined in the fight to Resolution's land grab.  Native American groups and conservationists worry about the impact to surrounding areas, including the steep cliffs at Apache Leap.  James Anaya, former United Nations special rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, said that without community and tribal support, Rio Tinto should abandon its Resolution Copper mining project.  United States Secretary of the Interior Sally Jewell said she was "profoundly disappointed with the Resolution Copper provision, which has no regard for lands considered sacred by nearby Indian tribes".By January 2015 over 104,000 had signed a petition to President Obama, "We the People|Stop Apache Land Grab".  Jodi Gillette, Special Assistant to the President for Native American Affairs, quickly gave an official White House response, vowing that the Obama Administration will work with Resolution Copper's parent company Rio Tinto to determine how to work with the tribes to preserve their sacred areas.In March 2016, the Forest Service added Oak Flat to the National Register of Historic Places. Arizona Republican Congressman Paul Gosar, who has characterized the dispute with the San Carlos Apache as "bogus," condemned the Historic Places designation by the Obama Administration and the Forest Service as "sabotaging an important mining effort."


== References ==