Black King (Ultra monster)

The Return of Ultraman (帰ってきたウルトラマン, Kaettekita Urutoraman, also known as Ultraman Jack), is a tokusatsu science fiction/kaiju/superhero TV series, and is the fourth in the Ultra Series.
Eiji Tsuburaya had originally intended for the Ultra Series to end with the 1967 series Ultra Seven (1967) but the former, alongside its originator Ultraman (1966) proved to be too popular a character to omit.
Eiji Tsuburaya died in 1970. His son Hajime Tsuburaya (who took over Tsuburaya Productions until his own death in 1973) revived the Ultra Series with The Return of Ultraman.
The show features a new Ultraman named "New Ultraman" (新ウルトラマン, Shin Urutoraman), or "Kaettekita Ultraman" (帰ってきたウルトラマン). In 1984, he was renamed "Ultraman Jack" (ウルトラマンジャック, Urutoraman Jakku) due to licensing issues. Tsuburaya and Bandai (which had just bought the Ultraman toy license in Japan) held a contest for children to pick a new name for this Ultraman. Although he is called "Ultraman Jack" for licensing in and out of Japan, he is still sometimes referred to as "New Ultraman"/"Kaettekita Ultraman", by some fans (and also in some official sources). This change was done due to a last-minute decision as the original plan for this series was for the original Ultraman to return to Earth to continue fighting against aliens and monsters.
While nearly identical to the original Ultraman in appearance, the red pattern on his silver suit is slightly different. Furthermore, the new Ultraman can be recognized by his shorter pants, the pinstripes along the red areas, and the fuller sleeves/kneepads. The characters and related events are described below using an in-universe tone.
Due to the mid-season addition of 'Ultraman' being Ultraman Jack, the series reintroduced his predecessors, Ultraman and Ultra Seven to the series canon - both of his predecessors were originally in different canon "universes" beforehand. This began a shared universe which continued throughout the Showa series, with Zoffy, Ultraman's superior, being reintroduced to the canon the following year in Ultraman Ace.


== Story ==
This series is a follow up to the original Ultraman & Ultra Seven that is set in 1971, four years after Ultraseven left Earth, and five years after Ultraman came to Earth. The first episode begins with a fight between two giant monsters named Takkong and Zazahn in Tokyo. Amid the monster destruction, young race-car driver Hideki Go is killed while trying to rescue a little boy and a dog from the falling rubble. His valiant sacrifice is noted by everyone, including his friends and the new defense force MAT (Monster Attack Team), but an unseen being also takes notice. Looking over Hideki is "New Ultraman" ("Ultraman Jack"), who is so touched by the race car driver's heroism, that he decides to combine his life force with that of Hideki, thus bringing him back to life (just like the original Ultraman did with Shin Hayata), much to everyone's astonishment. MAT then asks Hideki to join the team, which he does, especially since in this frightening new "Age of Monsters", Earth will need a savior. In times of crisis, Hideki will raise his right arm and, by force of will, transform into Ultraman to fight monsters. In addition, the original Ultraman and Ultra Seven are watching New Ultraman's battles from the sidelines, and offer their help when he is in peril.


== Production ==
For the first time, Ishirō Honda, best known for his work on the Godzilla movies and other classic Toho tokusatsu, worked on the Ultra Series, and directed some of the episodes of this series, including the first episode (titled "All Monsters Attack" (怪獣総進撃, Kaijū Sōshingeki), which is the same as the Japanese title for the film Destroy All Monsters). When translated into English, this title also follows the Japanese title for Godzilla's Revenge, All Monsters Attack.


== Episodes ==
All Monsters Attack Earthtron
Takkong's Big Counterattack
Evil Monster Realm of Terror
Certain Kill! Shooting Star Kick
Two Big Monsters Attack Tokyo
Battle! Monsters vs. MAT
Operation Rainbow Monster
Monster Time Bomb
Monster Island S.O.S.
Dinosaur Explosion Directive
Poison Gas Monster Appears
Revenge of Monster Shugaron
Terror of the Tsunami Monsters - Tokyo's Big Pinch!
Terror of Two Monsters - Tokyo's Giant Tornado
Revenge of the Monster Lad
Mysetery of the Big Bird Monster Pterochilus
Monster Bird Pterochilus - Tokyo Big Aerial Bombing
Ultraseven Arrives!
The Giant Invisible Monster That Came From Space
The Monster is a Giant Shooting Star in Space
Monster Channel
I'll Kill this Monster
Monster of Darkness, Spit Out the Stars!
Quake! Birth of the Condo Monster
Leaving My Home Planet Earth
Mystery! Homicide Beetle Incident
Go to Hell with This One Blow!
Big Operation - Ultra Special Attack
Jiroh Rides a Monster
The Accursed Skeleton God Oxster
In between a Devil and an Angel...
Decisive Battle Under the Setting Sun
The Monster User and the Boy
The Life that Can't be Forgiven
Atrocious! Light Monster PrizMA
Rout the Night
Ultraman Dies at Twilight
When the Ultra Star Shines
The Twentieth Century Yhetti
The Phantom Snow Woman
Revenge of Baltan-seijin Jr.
The Monster That Stands on Fuji
Demon God Barks at the Moon
To the Starry Sky with Love
Assassinate Hideki Goh!
This One Blow Filled with Anger
The Targeted Woman
I'm Taking the Earth!
Space Warrior, Your Name is MAT
Invitation from Hell
The Five Ultra Pledges


== Cast ==
Hideki Go (郷 秀樹, Gō Hideki): Jirō Dan (団 次郎, Dan Jirō)
Katsuichirō Katō (加藤 勝一郎, Katō Katsuichirō, 1-22): Nobuo Tsukamoto (塚本 信夫, Tsukamoto Nobuo)
Ryū Ibuki (伊吹 竜, Ibuki Ryū, 22-51): Jun Negami (根上 淳, Negami Jun)
Takeshi Minami (南 猛, Minami Takeshi, 1-32, 34-51): Shunsuke Ikeda (池田 駿介, Ikeda Shunsuke)
Fumio Kishida (岸田 文夫, Kishida Fumio, 1-29, 31, 34-51): Ken Nishida (西田 健, Nishida Ken)
Ippei Ueno (上野 一平, Ueno Ippei): Kō Mitsui (三井 恒, Mitsui Kō)
Yuriko Oka (丘 ユリ子, Oka Yuriko, 1-32, 34-51): Mika Katsuragi (桂木 美加, Katsuragi Mika)
Ken Sakata (坂田 健, Sakata Ken, 1-37): Shin Kishida (岸田 森, Kishida Shin)
Aki Sakata (坂田 アキ, Sakata Aki, 1-37): Rumi Sakakibara (榊原 るみ, Sakakibara Rumi)
Jirō Sakata (坂田 次郎, Sakata Jirō): Hideki Kawaguchi (川口 英樹, Kawaguchi Hideki)
Rumiko Murano (村野 ルミ子, Murano Rumiko, 38-41, 44, 49, 51): Kazuko Iwasaki (岩崎 和子, Iwasaki Kazuko)
Staff officer Satake (佐竹 参謀, Satake Sanbo, 5, 6, 11, 20, 50): Kenji Sahara (佐原 健二, Sahara Kenji)
Chief Kishida (岸田 長官, Kishida Chōkan, 5, 6, 14): Susumu Fujita (藤田 進, Fujita Susumu)
Narrator: Akira Nagoya (名古屋 章, Nagoya Akira)Voice actorsUltraman (ウルトラマン, Urutoraman): Isao Yatsu (谷津 勲, Yatsu Isao, 1, 18, 30, 31, 37), Ichirō Murakoshi (村越 伊知郎, Murakoshi Ichirō, 50)
Ultraseven (ウルトラセブン, Urutorasebun, 18): Ichirō Murakoshi
Alien Zelan (ゼラン星人, Zeran Seijin, 31), Draculas (ドラキュラス, Dorakyurasu, 36): Tetsuya Kaji (梶 哲也, Kaji Tetsuya)
Alien Nackle (ナックル星人, Nakkuru Seijin, 38): Ritsuo Sawa (沢 りつお, Sawa Ritsuo)
Alien Varduck (バルダック星人, Barudakku Seijin, 39), Alien Messie (メシエ星雲人, Meshie Seiunjin, 45), Alien Zoole boss (ズール星人上司, Zūru Seijin Jōshi), Sasahiler (ササヒラー, Sasahirā, 48), Original Ultraman (初代ウルトラマン, Shodai Urutoraman, 51): Isao Yatsu
Alien Baltan Jr. (バルタン星人Jr., Barutan Seijin Junia, 41), Alien Stora (ストラ星人, Sutora Seijin, 42), Alien Bat (バット星人, Batto Seijin, 51): Osamu Saka (阪 脩, Saka Osamu)
Yametarans (ヤメタランス, Yametaransu, 48): Osamu Ichikawaa (市川 治, Ichikawa Osamu)


== Songs ==


=== Theme song ===
"Kaettekita Ultraman" (帰ってきたウルトラマン, Kaettekita Urutoraman, "The Return of Ultraman")
Lyrics: Kyōichi Azuma
Composition: Koichi Sugiyama
Artist: Jiro Dan, Misuzu Children's Choral Group


=== Related songs ===
"MAT Team Song", "Monster Ondo", Columbia's original program "Monster Lock" and so on were composed. None of them were used in production, but they were streamed at various event venues at the time of airing. "Monster Ondo" was used in the last of "The men who made Ultraman: To the Forest of the Stars, "and the ones that changed the lyrics have been used in "I love Ultra Seven ." Also, in "The Song of MAT Team", there is a cover version by Toshiyuki Nishida/Shonen Girl Choir Mizuumi, which was released by Asahi Sonorama (EP version).


=== Other songs ===
In the seventh episode, there is a scene where the youngsters of the night camp are dancing to The Mops' "I can't wait until morning" (Victor board). Also, at the beginning of episode 16, "Golden Cups' Silver Glass" is used in a similar situation.
In episode 34, PYG's "flower, sun, rain" was used. This song is included in "Returned Ultraman Music File" released by Bop in 1999. Ichikawa Moriichi had a close relationship with PYG member Kenichi Kuwahara, Ichikawa then asked Kuwahara for permission, and the use of "flower, sun, and rain" was realized.
There is a scene where Captain Ibuki of episode 43 goes on a family trip, and Ibuki does a rhythm by hearing "Sent to the Southern National Landsera" flowing from the car radio. This song is the song of Peggy Hayama, who is the wife of Ibuki and Ryo Negami, and Hayama would later play Ultra Mother's voice and human body (green aunt) in "Ultraman Taro" .
In the 48th episode, The Drifters' "Someone and Somebody" was used, and in the following 49th episode, "The Offense of Driff" was used.


== Manga ==
A manga series by Akira Mizuho (水穂 輝, Mizuho Akira) ran in Bessatsu Shōnen Sunday from May to December 1971.


== References ==