Islamic World Academy of Sciences (IAS)

The Islamic World Academy of Sciences (IAS) is a non-profit organisation of scientists and technologists that works for the promotion of science and technology in the Islamic world. It was founded in 1986.


== Foundation ==
The establishment of the Islamic world Academy of Sciences (IAS) was initially proposed by the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation) Standing Committee on Scientific and Technological Co-operation (COMSTECH), and approved by the Fourth Islamic Summit held in Casablanca in 1984.
Upon the invitation of Jordan, the Founding Conference of the Academy was held in Amman (Jordan) in October 1986, under the patronage of HRH Prince Al-Hassan, who accepted the patronage of the Academy together with HE the President of Pakistan.
Operating from its Amman Secretariat, the Academy aims to continue the work it had started in 1986, assisting the decision-makers and scientists and technologists of the OIC-Member Countries and helping them achieve an advanced level of development for their countries.


== IAS Objectives ==
The main objectives of the IAS are to:

Serve as a consultative organisation of the Muslim Ummah and institutions of member states of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), on matters related to science and technology.
Initiate scientific and technological programmes and activities in science and technology, and to encourage co-operation among research groups in the various Islamic countries on projects of common interest.
Encourage and promote research on major problems of importance facing Islamic countries and to identify future technologies of relevance for possible adoption and utilisation.
Formulate standards of scientific performance and attainment, and to award prizes and honours for outstanding scientific achievements to individuals and to centres of excellence in all science and technology disciplines.


== IAS Programme ==


=== General ===
The underlying objective of the programme of the Islamic World Academy of Sciences is to establish a framework for the development of science and technology in the Islamic World.
The programme, by facilitating interaction among scientists, and promoting the exchange of views and ideas on science and technology issues in particular, can catalyse the overall process of socio-economic development in Islamic countries.
Since its inception in 1986, the IAS has been implementing programmes that address serious contemporary issues facing the Islamic World, with the aim of formulating remedial policies that can be adopted by OIC and developing countries in their quest to achieve their development objectives.
Operating on a year to year basis, the IAS has organised several international conferences, published a series of Conference Proceedings, Newsletters and some monographs, and has also established a quality Science Journal which is of an international standard.
Moreover, the IAS has established numerous contacts with national and international non-governmental organisations, as well as governments throughout the World.


== IAS Activities ==


=== General ===
Since its establishment, the IAS has been implementing regular and ad hoc activities that are in line with its programme. The objective of all such activities has been to advance the science and technology sector in OIC and developing countries. This, the IAS believes, can generate increased interest in this sector, enabling countries to reap the fruits of its outputs in the areas of education, health, industry, and human welfare in general.


=== What have we accomplished? ===
The IAS has built itself into an action-oriented institution of OIC-Member countries utilising most of its limited resources for activities that accelerate the pace of development of OIC-Member countries.
	Operating on a year to year basis, the Academy has been promoting joint Islamic action through its specialised scientific conferences; publishing a series of Conference Proceedings (Policy Documents), journals, books, newsletters, and establishing a quality medical journal that is of an international standard; as well as organising a number of quality training programmes.
	Most of all, the Academy has managed to define a very useful dual role for itself namely as a programme implementation and policy-making body dedicated to contributing to the development of the OIC-Member countries and humanity.
	Further, the Academy has established numerous contacts with a number of international non-governmental organisations, as well as governments throughout the world.


== International Outreach ==


=== General ===
A primary function of the Academy is to act as a Pan-Islamic affiliating body to the relevant international organisations. Through this, Muslim scholars can have a channel of communication, through the Academy, with such international agencies as the UNESCO, the World Bank, etc.
At the level of the OIC, examples of the co-operation that exists between the Academy and other institutions are outlined


=== Co-operation with COMSTECH ===
The Islamic World Academy of Sciences and COMSTECH have had solid relations, since COMSTECH helped to create the Academy in 1986, in compliance with the OIC Summit recommendations.
	The IAS and COMSTECH regularly exchange information on programmes and act, each within its catchment area, to promote S&T activities and encourage OIC countries to increase their S&T expenditure.


=== Co-operation with the IDB ===
The IDB has been helping to finance Academy conferences since 1990. It has often delegated its own specialists to present papers describing its activities within the scope of the theme of the annual IAS Conference.
	The IAS has furthermore been active in promoting the IDB’s Prize for Science and Technology, which aims to encourage and promote excellence among OIC S&T institutions.


=== Co-operation with the UNESCO ===
The IAS, during March 2009, participated in the launch of the UNESCO International Science, Technology and Innovation Centre for South-South Cooperation (ISTIC) in Kuala Lumpur and has implemented a number of programmes with this newly founded centre since.
Furthermore, the IAS - through Prof. Adnan Badran FIAS and Moneef Zou’bi, DG-IAS - was commissioned to author the ‘Arab States Chapter’ of the UNESCO Science Report 2010, a task that has been successfully accomplished.
The IAS also has been invited through Dr Moneef Zou’bi to author the ‘Arab States Chapter’ of the UNESCO Science Report for 2015.


=== Co-operation with the ISESCO ===
In its effort to establish scientific and academic relations with similar Islamic organisations, the Academy signed a co-operation agreement with the Islamic Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation (ISESCO), in 1989.
	ISESCO has co-sponsored the 2001 Conference of the IAS on Biotechnology, held in Rabat (Morocco), and contributed a paper at that conference on Biotechnology Research in OIC countries. Furthermore, ISESCO participated and sponsored the IAS Conferences of 2006 and 2008.


=== Co-operation with TWAS ===
The Academy signed a co-operation agreement with The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) some years ago. That was a first step towards enhancing co-operation between these two international academies, which have been in close liaison recently on their scientific activities. The IAS often joins TWAS at its scientific meetings and both academies exchange information in the context of G77, as well as TWNSO meetings, especially as the IAS has been a member of the Third World Network of Scientific Organisation (TWNSO) for a number of years.


=== Co-operation with the InterAcademy Partnership (IAP) ===
In order to interact fully with 100 or so national and international academies of sciences the world over, the IAS joined the Inter-Academy Partnership, which is a global network of science academies. The IAS was elected to join the IAP at latter's General Assembly Meeting which was held in Alexandria, Egypt, during December 2006.


=== Co-operation with Academies of Sciences ===
The IAS has signed Memoranda of Understanding with the Kazakhstan, the Azerbaijan, and the Uzbekistan Academies of Sciences. These agreements lay the foundation for long-term co-operative relationships between OIC institutions and these republics and their scientific infrastructure.
	Contacts with the US National Academy of Sciences have been ongoing for over ten years, resulting in the participation of top US NAS representatives in some IAS activities. Moreover, the US NAS has regularly nominated its Foreign Secretary to participate in IAS conferences.
The IAS has been actively supporting the Palestine Academy of Science and Technology (PALAST) through facilitating the participation of PALAST officials in the various scientific activities in the Middle East, as well as providing help and advice to this sister academy on a regular bases.
The Bangladesh Academy of Sciences played an important part in organising the 19th IAS conference which was held in Dhaka, Bangladesh, and a number of the BAS Fellows took part in the conference.


=== Co-operation with the Inter Academy Medical Panel (IAMP) ===
The Inter Academy Medical Panel on Global Health Issues (IAMP) is an association created by the world’s academies of medicine and academies of sciences or engineering having members from the health sciences for the purpose of working together through bilateral, regional and worldwide. The IAS was elected to join the IAMP at latter's General Assembly Meeting which was held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, during March 2010.


=== Co-operation with the International Union of Academies (IUA) ===
During September 2011, the IAS hosted a meeting of the executive council of the IUA at IAS Headquarters in Amman, where a number of IUA matters as well as a number of possible joint initiatives between the IAS and IUA were discussed.
During January 2014, the IAS co-organised an international conference in Erlangen (Germany) under the title The Impact of Arabic Sources on Divination and the Practical Sciences in Europe and Asia in association with the International Union of Academies (IUA).
The IAS will co-organise a second IUA International Conference on the “Impact of Arab Sciences in Europe and Asia from the Middle Ages to the Modern Period,” to be held in Amman (Jordan), during April 2017.


=== Co-operation with the InterAction Council (IAC) ===
The InterAction Council was established in 1983 as an independent international organization to mobilize the experience, energy and international contacts of a group of statesmen who have held the highest office in their own countries.
In May 2013, IAS President presented a keynote address at the 31st Annual Plenary Meeting of the Interaction Council, 9–11 May 2013, Manama, Bahrain, under the title Uprisings in the Arab World: The Reality beyond the Failure of Politics and Policies.
	During November 2013, the IAS-DG contributed a paper to the InterAction Council publication entitled The Arab Pseudo-Spring? A Snapshot of the Underlying Politics and Economics, and the Challenge of Water Insecurity.
On 20 October 2014, the Council launched its latest publication, “Water, Energy, and the Arab Awakening.” This book is the third in the Council’s “Global Agenda” series and the second book the Council has published in partnership with the United Nations University Institute of Water, Environment and Health (UNU-INWEH).


== IAS Publications ==


=== Conference proceedings ===
The Islamic Academy of Sciences - Proceedings of the Founding Conference (1986) - Published by the Islamic Academy of Sciences - Editor: A. Kettani (Morocco).
Food Security in the Muslim World - Proceedings of the first international conference, Amman (Jordan) (1987) - Published by the Islamic-World Academy of Sciences - Editor: S. Qasem (Jordan).
Science and Technology Policy for Self-Reliance in the Muslim World - Proceedings of the second international conference, Islamabad (Pakistan) (1988) - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences - Editors: F. Daghestani (Jordan), H. El-Mulki (Jordan), and M. Al-Halaiqa (Jordan).
New Technologies and Development of the Muslim World - Proceedings of the third international conference, (Kuwait) (1989) - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences - Editors: F. Daghestani (Jordan), and S. Qasem (Jordan).
Technology Transfer for Development in the Muslim World - Proceedings of the fourth international conference, Antalya (Turkey) (1990) - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences - Editors: F. Daghestani (Jordan), A. Altamemi (Jordan), and M. Ergin (Turkey).
Science and Technology Manpower Development in the Islamic World - Proceedings of the fifth international conference, Amman (Jordan) (1991) - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences - Editors: F. Daghestani (Jordan), A. Altamemi (Jordan), and H. El-Mulki (Jordan).
Environment and Development in the Islamic World - Proceedings of the sixth international conference, Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) (1992) - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences - Editors: S. Al-Athel (Saudi Arabia), and F. Daghestani (Jordan).
Health, Nutrition and Development in the Islamic World - Proceedings of the seventh international conference, Dakar (Senegal) (1993) - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences - Editors: N. Bor (Turkey), A. Kettani (Morocco), and Moneef R. Zou'bi (Jordan).
Water in the Islamic World: An Imminent Crisis - Proceedings of the eighth international conference, Khartoum (Sudan) (1994) - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences - Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), H. Dogan Altinbilek (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou'bi (Jordan).
Science and Technology Education for Development in the Islamic World- Proceedings of the ninth international conference, Tehran (Iran) (1999) – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), M. Doruk (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) .
Information Technology for Development in the Islamic World- Proceedings of the tenth international conference, Tunis (Tunisia) (2000) – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), M. Doruk (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) (ISBN 9957-412-03-5).
Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering for Development in the Islamic World- Proceedings of the eleventh international conference, Rabat (Morocco) (2001) – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: A. S. Majali (Jordan), M. Ergin (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) (ISBN 9957-412-07-8).
Materials Science and Technology and Culture of Science, Proceedings of the twelfth international conference, Islamabad (Pakistan), (2002) – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) (ISBN 9957-412-06-X).
Energy for Sustainable Development and Science for the Future of the Islamic World and Humanity, Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference, Kuching, Sarawak (Malaysia), (2003) – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) (ISBN 9957-412-08-6).
Science Technology and Innovation for Socioeconomic Development of OIC-Member Countries: Towards Vision 1441, Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference, Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), (2005) – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) (ISBN 9957-412-11-6).
Higher Education Excellence for Development in the Islamic World, Proceedings of the fifteenth international conference, Ankara (Turkey), (2006) – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) (ISBN 978-9957-412-18-0).
Science and Technology and Innovation for Sustainable Development in the Islamic World: Policies and Politics Rapprochement, Proceedings of the sixteenth International conference, Kazan (Tatarstan), (2008) – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) (ISBN 978-9957-412-19-7).
Towards the Knowledge Society in the Islamic World: Knowledge Production, Application and Dissemination, Proceedings of the seventeenth international conference, Shah Alam, Selangor (Malaysia); 2009 - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: M. Ergin (Turkey), and Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan) (ISBN 978-9957-412-22-7).
The Islamic World and the West: Rebuilding Bridges through Science and Technology, Doha (Qatar), 2011 - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan). http://www.iasworld.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Qatar-Contents-Final.pdf
Achieving Socioeconomic Development in the Islamic World through Science, Technology and Innovation, Dhaka (Bangladesh), 2013 – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editor: Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan),and Najwa F. Daghestani (Jordan). http://www.iasworld.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Bangladesh-Contents.pdf
Science, Technology and Innovation: Building Humanity’s Common Future, Tehran (Iran), 2015 – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, Editors: Moneef R. Zou’bi (Jordan), and Najwa F. Daghestani (Jordan). http://www.iasworld.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Tehran-Contents.pdf


=== Books ===
Islamic Thought and Modern Science - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (1997) - Author: Mumtaz A. Kazi.
Qur'anic Concepts and Scientific Theories - Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (1999) – Author: Mumtaz A. Kazi.
Personalities Noble Editor: Hakim Mohammed Said, Second Revised Edition, Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (2000), Editor: Moneef R. Zou’bi (Arabic-English). .
Declarations of the Islamic World Academy of Sciences – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (2005), Editor: Moneef. R. Zou'bi (ISBN 9957-412-09-4).
Islamic World Academy of Sciences Outreach, – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (2005), Editor: Moneef R. Zou'bi (ISBN 9957-412-10-8).
Intellectual Property Rights: An Introduction for Scientists and Technologists – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (2006), Author: Mohamed B. E. Fayez (ISBN 978-9957-412-18-0).
Reverse Engineering: The Permissible but not Well-Recognized -Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (2010), Author: Mohamed B. E. Fayez (ISBN 978-9957-412-20-3).
The Discoveries in the Islamic Countries – Arabic Edition Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (2012), Author: Ahmed Djebbar (ISBN 978-9957-412-23-4).
The Essentials of Science, Technology and Innovation Policy – Published by the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (2013), Author: Tan Sri Dr Omar Abdel Rahman (ISBN 978-983-9445-95-4).Source: Islamic World Academy of Sciences (IAS)


=== Periodicals ===


==== IAS Medical Journal ====
The Medical Journal of the Islamic World Academy of Sciences, which first appeared in August 1988, is a quality publication comparable to international scientific journals. The Journal has established itself as a major scientific publication in the Islamic world and has been granted an ISS number (ISSN 1016-3360). It is a forum for scientists and technologists in developing countries through which they can get their research work published.
The Journal, which is published in Turkey and distributed internationally, was launched with the help of the Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Sciences (KFAS), and has since, received some grants from the Academy Secretariat and COMSTECH.


==== IAS Newsletter ====

The IAS, through its Secretariat, regularly publishes the Newsletter of the Islamic World Academy of Sciences.This widely distributed publication aims to publicise the various activities the IAS undertakes, and also to put across the Academy’s programmes. It also often contains news about the Academy, its Fellows and staff.
The Newsletter, as well as regularly profiling some Academy Fellows, frequently contains specialised and guest articles on contemporary scientific and technical topics including such matters as the S&T potential of OIC-member countries and institutions.


==== Islamic Thought and Scientific Creativity (in Arabic) ====
Upon the request of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), Standing Committee on Scientific and Technological Co-operation (COMSTECH), and under its sponsorship, the Academy published for over 6 years (1991 – 1996) the Arabic version of COMSTECH’s Islamic Thought and Scientific Creativity, the high quality quarterly publication.
A total of twenty issues of the Arabic version were published and distributed. This was done, as a joint activity of the Academy and the Amman-based Royal Academy for Islamic Civilisation Research, Al Albait Foundation, Amman, Jordan.


== Structure ==
The structure of the IAS consists of a General Assembly, Council, Headquarters, Fellows, Deceased Fellows and Ibrahim Award.


=== IAS General Assembly ===
The Academy itself is governed by the General Assembly in which all founding and elected Fellows are member. The number of Academy Fellows was 110 on 1 December 2016. They represent more than 40 countries and many scientific disciplines. The Fellows of the Academy are eminent figures, each in his/her field has achieved a great deal and has contributed significantly both to his/her country’s development and the global arena. Since its establishment in 1986, the General Assembly has convened annually and the major issues discussed at each of these gatherings are the planning and accomplishing of future Academy activities.


=== IAS Council ===
The Council is responsible for the management and direction of the Academy and consists of eleven executive members which are elected by the General Assembly for a four-year term of office, and which is subject to its regulation and supervision.
Council of the Islamic World Academy of Sciences (2017–2021)


=== IAS Headquarters ===

Based in Amman, the capital of Jordan, the academy secretariat is the executive arm of the IAS and its primary function is to maintain the institutional establishment of the IAS and implement its plan of action within the guidelines set by the Council and General Assembly. The secretariat receives an annual maintenance grant and is provided with the diplomatic immunities by the Jordanian government.


=== Fellows ===
Source: Islamic World Academy of Sciences (IAS)


=== Ibrahim Award Laureates of IAS ===
Prof. Ugur Dilmen 1996, Turkey.
Prof. Mohammad Abdollahi, 2005, Iran.
Prof. Mohammaed Mannan Al-Qattan 2007, Saudi Arabia
Dr Faris Gavrankapetanovic 2009, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Dr Saima Riazuddin 2011, Pakistan.
Prof. Liaquat Ali 2013, Bangladesh.
Prof. Jackie Ying 2015, Singapore.
Prof. Ameenah Gurib-Fakim, Republic of Mauritius.Source: Islamic World Academy of Sciences (IAS)


=== Deceased Fellows of IAS ===
Prof. Mohammad Ibrahim (1911–1988)   Bangladesh.
Prof. Djibril Fall (1930–1992)   Senegal.
Prof. Salimuzzaman Siddiqui (1897–1994)   Pakistan.
Prof. Abdus Salam Mia (1925–1995)   Bangladesh/USA.
Prof. Suleiman Gabir Hamad (1937–1996)   Sudan.
Prof. Mohammad R Siddiqui (1908–1998)   Pakistan.
Prof. Abdullah M Sharafuddin (1930–1998)   Bangladesh.
Prof. Achmed Baiquni (1923–1998)   Indonesia.
Prof. Mumtaz Ali Kazi (1928–1999)   Pakistan.
Prof. Farmaz G Maksudor ( 1930–2000)   Azerbaijan.
Prof. Ali Kettani (1941–2001)   Morocco.
Prof. Mohamed Kamel Mahmoud (1926–2003)   Egypt
Prof. Samaun Samadikun (1931–2006)   Indonesia
Prof. Iftikhar Ahmad Malik (1936-2006) Pakistan
Prof. John (Younis) A. Katili (1929-2008) Indonesia
Prof. Ibrahim Mar Diop (1921-2008) Senegal
Prof. Syed Zahir Haider (1927-2008) Bangladesh
Prof. Mohammad Ilyas Burney (1922-2008) Pakistan
Prof. Badri Muhammad (1943-2009) Malaysia
Prof. Pulat K Khabibullaev (1936-2010) Uzbekistan
Prof. Mohammed Anwar Waqar (1941-2010) Pakistan
Prof. Souleymane Niang (1929-2010) Senegal
Prof. Ahmad Nawawi Ayoub (1937-2010) Malaysia
Prof. Kamal H. Batanouny (1936-2011) Egypt
Prof. Mohamed B E Fayez (1927-2011) Egypt
Prof. Mazhar M Qurashi (1925-2011) Pakistan
Prof. Mahmoud Hafez (1912-2011) Egypt
Prof. Jamal Nazrul-Islam (1939-2013) Bangladesh
Prof. Riazuddin (1930-2013) Pakistan
Prof. Naeem Ahmad Khan (1928-2013) Pakistan
Prof. Mehmet Nimet Ozdas (1921-2014) Turkey
Prof. Ugur Dilmen (1955-2015) Turkey
Prof. Ibrahim Gamil Badran (1924-2015) Egypt
Prof. Fakhruddin Daghestani (1936-2016) Jordan
Prof. Ibrahim Wone (1926-2016) Senegal
Prof. Syed Qasim Mehdi (1941-2016) Pakistan
Prof. Korkut Ozal (1929-2016) Turkey
Prof. Mohammad Salimullah (1949-2016) Bangladesh
Prof. Attia A. Ashour (1924-2016) Egypt
Prof. Mustafa Doruk (1932-2017) Turkey
Prof. Ishfaq Ahmad (1930-2018)	Pakistan
Prof. Naci Bor	(1928-2018) Turkey
Prof. Salambek Khadjiev (1941-2018)	Chechnya
Prof. Makhmud Salakhitdinov (1933-2018) Uzbekistan
Prof. Adnan Hamoui (1932-2018) Syria
Prof. M Ajmal Khan (1953-2019) PakistanSource: Islamic World Academy of Sciences (IAS)


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Ergin, M., Altinbilek, H. D., Zou'bi, M. R. (Editors), 1994. Water in the Islamic World: An Imminent Crises. Amman, Jordan: Islamic World Academy of Sciences.
Zou'bi, M. R., 2008. Overview of the IAS. Amman, Jordan: Islamic World Academy of Sciences (IAS).
Ergin, M., and Zou’bi, M. R., 2009. Higher Education Excellence for Development in the Islamic World. Amman, Jordan: Islamic World Academy of Sciences.


== External links ==
Official website