Kenya Vision 2030

Kenya Vision 2030 (Swahili: Ruwaza ya Kenya 2030) is the country's development programme from 2008 to 2030. It was launched on 10 June 2008 by President Mwai Kibaki. Its objective is to help transform Kenya into a "newly industrializing, middle-income (income exceeding World's average currently at US$10000) country providing a high quality of life to all its citizens by 2030 in a clean and secure environment." Developed through "an all-inclusive and participatory stakeholder consultative process, involving Kenyans from all parts of the country," the Vision is based on three "pillars": Economic, Social, and Political. The Vision's adoption comes after the country's GDP growth went from 0.6% in 2002 to 6.1% in 2006, under Kibaki's Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment Creation (ERS).
The Kenya Vision 2030 is to be implemented in successive five-year plans, with the first such plan covering the period 2008–2012. Under the Vision, Kenya expected to meet its Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by the deadline in 2015, although this has not been achieved.
The Vision 2030 development process was launched by President Mwai Kibaki on 30 October 2006 when he instructed the National Vision Steering Committee to produce a medium-term plan with full details on the development programmes that would be implemented in the first five years after the ERS expires on 31 December 2007. A consultative approach was undertaken through workshops with stakeholders from all levels of the public service, the private sector, civil society, the media and NGOs while in rural areas, provincial consultative forums were also held throughout the country.
The objective of all these consultations was to provide an in-depth understanding of the country's development problems and the necessary strategies to achieve the 2030 goals.
A similar process and methodology was followed in identifying projects and priorities in the social and political pillars. Detailed analysis was carried out under a consultative process in order to come up with strategies capable of resolving the social and political problems that Kenyans face today. To arrive at workable solutions, the team of experts learned as much as they could from countries that have achieved rapid growth and also improved the lives of their people greatly in a span of 20–30 years, The team made extensive use of information available from the government, Kenya's private sector, civil society and universities.


== Foundations ==
The Vision 2030 strategy focus on reforms and development across 10 key sectors:

Infrastructure.
Science, Technology and Innovation.
Public Sector Reforms.
Tourism.
Agriculture.
Trade.
Manufacturing.
BPO(Business Process Outsourcing) & ICT(Information Communication & Technology).
Financial Services.
Education & Training.


== Pillars ==


=== Economic ===
This aims at improving the prosperity of all Kenyans through an economic development programme, covering all the regions of Kenya. It aims to achieve an average Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate of 10% per annum beginning in 2012. To achieve this target, Kenya is continuing with the tradition of macro-economic stability that has been established since 2002. It is also addressing other key constraints, notably, a low savings to GDP ratio, which can be alleviated by drawing in more remittances from Kenyans abroad, as well as increased foreign investment and overseas development assistance (ODA).
Delivering the country's ambitious growth aspirations required a rise of national savings from 17% in 2006 to about 30% in 2012. It was also found necessary to deal with a significant informal economy employing 75% of the country's workers. The informal sector is being supported in ways that will raise productivity and distribution and increase jobs, owner's incomes and public revenues.
Kenya has recorded an economic growth of 5.7 percent in the first quarter of year 2018. This has been attributed to the trickle down effect of the  " Handshake " leading to stabilized political environment.The country is continuing with the governance and institutional reforms necessary to accelerate economic growth. Other critical problems being addressed include poor infrastructure and high energy costs.
The six key sectors described below are being given priority as the key growth drivers for achievement of the economic vision:

Tourism and mining
Increasing value in agriculture
A better and more inclusive wholesale and retail trade sector
Manufacturing for the regional market
B P O (Business Process Outsourcing)
Financial servicesIt is notable that with each Government comes spheres of interest but with the change of guard this has not been necessarily so in Kenya. The New administration of Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta has rather picked some key economic deliverables in the vision in what in 2018 he has characterized as "The Big Four" being within the framework of Vision 2030.
These are

Universal Healthcare,Manufacturing,Affordable Housing andFood Security,These key pillars were as a result of the hotly contested elections of 2017 that led to an annulment of the Presidential vote by the country's Supreme Court led by Chief Justice Maraga.
Notwithstanding same over 10,000 km s of road are to be tarmacked in the period 2013 to 2022 with 3000 km in progress by 2018!
SGR (Standard gauge Railway)  modernisation of Kenya Railway system on the southern Corridor phase 1 is complete from Mombasa to Nairobi while phase 2 Nairobi to Naivasha is in progress as of May 2018; with the longest Rail tunnel in Africa at Kibiko, Ngong in advanced stages! Tendering of 3Rd phase is in Progress .
Under Lappset A key deliverable Under vision 2030, Isiolo Airport is complete as of 2017, while Konza City and Lamu Port have received renewed interest In #2018.
Either Road works completed under vision 2030 include Mombasa Road, with major funds still being pumped in, Thika Super Highway or commonly known as( Kibaki Free Way ) due its convenience, Outerring Road, Southern Bypass, Eastern By pass and Northern Bypass. Others include Ngong Road expansion and Langata road expansion.
Major malls with grade one offices in what has been characterized as Public Private partnership have been constructed and completed in Nairobi and its environs. This include Garden city and TRM on Thika Superhighway, Two Rivers along the Northern And southern Bypasses.
Even so, the advent of Devolution with 47 county governments has thrust Kenya into one investment destination with individual Counties competing to bring investors within their borders and or regions. This has become a major catalyst for growth as county headquarters have become new centres of growth even as key roads get opened as the case of Marsabit, an oasis in a desert after completion of Isiolo- Marsabit to Ethiopia border Highway a part of Cape Cairo Pan African Highway. This among many such regional projects in progress is positioning every region in Kenya and the neighboring countries to Profit from Vision 2030, a brainchild of 3Rd president of Kenya H.E Emilio Mwai Kibaki EGH and His Rainbow team!
Vision 2030, A vision that showed the dreams and aspirations of Kenyans remains on course. However Financing gaps remain and hold an ugly face to its successful completion. This challenges have been unmasked even more by unchecked corruption that continues to bedevil the East African State. Either the Funding from China has come as a blessing in disguise with Chinese loans and Money being better utilised under Chinese expatriates in projects ranging from airports, rail, road and increasingly trade.
These has included major expansions of JKIA(Jomo Kenyatta international Airport) Moi airport Kisumu and Nairobi-Nakuru high way still in progress. Major roads in Kisumu, Mombasa and Nairobi are currently under major expansions as per vision 2030. Even more expansion of infrastructure in both the Northern and Southern Transport Corridor is currently in progress.
This has included projects in power with renewable energy taking centre stage with geothermal in Okario, Naivasha and wind mills in Ngong Hills, Turkana and Marsabit. A major reliance of the country's power need is now in renewable energy sources with the country eager to attract funds from international partners as the tightening of monetary policy becomes severe post 2017 interest capping regime in Kenya's Banking sector.
This has seen China emerge as the biggest holder of Kenyan foreign debt at more than 60% in May 2018 at over Ksh 700 billion. Indeed, the Chinese have partnered with Kenya towards attainment of vision 2030 goals.
Investments in Technological hubs have led to Nairobi being termed as Africa's silicone Savannah with products such as Mpesa getting acclaimed globally. Developments in ICT have seen government services, financial services become more inclusive with introduction of services such as Huduma Centres, Lipa na Mpesa.  This has made Kenya jump directly from agricultural revolution to Information revolution within a decade.
Industrialisation as per the big four that entails quality life for all Kenya's, has received renewed focus as per the big four agenda of the Jubilee Government of Kenyatta the second!
Exploitation of Mineral wealth with major discoveries in Gold, oil, coal, Rare earths etc.  with tens of trillions of shillings worth present a big boast towards funding of this ambitious Vision.
The future of Kenya has never been any brighter!


=== Social ===
Through this strategy, Kenya aims to build a just and cohesive society with social equity in a clean and secure environment. It, therefore, presents comprehensive social interventions aimed at improving the quality of life of all Kenyans and Kenyan residents. This strategy makes special provisions for Kenyans with various disabilities (PWDs) and previously marginalized communities. These policies (and those in the economic pillar) are equally anchored on an all-round adoption of science, technology and innovation (STI) as an implementation tool.
Key sectors:

Education & training
The health system
Water and sanitation
The environment
Housing and urbanization
Gender, youth and vulnerable groups
Equity and poverty elimination
Reconciliation


=== Political ===
This aims to realize a democratic political system founded on issue-based politics that respects the rule of law, and protects the rights and freedoms of every individual in Kenyan society. It hopes to transform Kenya into a state in which equality is entrenched, irrespective of one's race, ethnicity, religion, gender or socio-economic status; a nation that respects and harnesses the diversity of its peoples’ values, traditions and aspirations for the benefit of all its citizens.
The political pillar vision for 2030 is “a democratic political system that is issue-based, people-centered, result-oriented and accountable to the public”. An issue-based system is one in which political differences are about means to meet the widest public interest. “People-centered” goals refer to the system's responsiveness to the needs and rights of citizens, whose participation in all public policies and resource allocation processes is both fully appreciated and facilitated. A result-oriented system is stable, pr edictable and whose performance is based on measurable outcomes. An accountable system is one that is open and transparent and one that permits free flow of information. This vision is expected to guarantee Kenya's attainment of the specific goals outlined under Vision 2030's economic and social pillars
To meet objectives outlined in the economic and social pillars, Kenya's national governance system is being transformed and reformed to acquire high-level executive capability consistent with a rapidly industrializing country. The country is adopting a democratic decentralization process with substantial devolution in policy-making, public resource management and revenue sharing through devolved funds. This has been achieved through a delivery of a new constitutional dispensation which came in effect in August 2010.
Transformation within Kenya's political governance system under Vision 2030 is expected to take place across six strategic initiatives, whose overarching visions, goals and specific strategies for 2012 are as follows:

Rule of law
Electoral & political processes
Democracy and public service delivery
Transparency and accountability
Security, peace building and conflict management


== Guiding principles ==
To ensure that economic, social and political governance gains made under the Vision are neither reversed nor lost as a result of change in ruling parties, the following eight governance principles will be adhered to:

Constitutional supremacy: Supremacy of the constitution shall be respected at all times. Political and property rights are guaranteed in the Bill of Rights.
Sovereignty of the people: The government derives all its just powers from the people it governs.
Equality of citizens: Kenya will not discriminate any citizen on the basis of gender, race, tribe, religion or ancestral origin.
National values, goals and ideology: Kenyans shall formulate and adopt a core set of national values, goals and a political ideology supportive of Vision 2030, these will include acknowledgement of the significance of God to the Kenyan people and an affirmation of the religious, cultural and ethnic diversity of Kenyans. It will also affirm the indivisibility of Kenya as a nation and her commitment to democracy and the rule of law.
A viable political party system: Kenya aims at a political party system that will be guided by policy and ideological differences rather than region of ethnicity. Founding of political parties on religious, linguistic, racial, ethnic, gender, corporate or regional basis will be prohibited. All political parties will be obliged to subscribe to a legally-binding Code of Conduct. There will be a clear definition of circumstances under which a party may be de-registered or reinstated. The delegation of state functions to (or the use of state resources by) political parties will not be permitted. Political parties will be required to publish their manifestos before participating in elections.
Public participation in governance: Kenyans shall appreciate the values of tolerance and respect for differences in opinion in a competitive society.
Separation of powers: Legislature, the Executive and Judiciary institutions are independently functioning in a manner that enhances the implementation of Vision 2030.
Decentralisation: Vision 2030 uses devolved funds to strengthen decentralization of development projects at the community level.


== Implementation ==
A Semi Autonomous Government Agency (SAGA) with the requisite capacity has been established to oversee the implementation of all the Vision 2030 projects. The agency works closely in collaboration with public and private sector, civil society and other relevant stakeholder groups. The strategies to deliver the 10% annual growth by 2012 is being executed through flagship projects across the priority sectors in all the three pillars of the Vision. The projects are original large-scale initiatives that look beyond their immediate locality. Flagship projects form part of the national development with complementary projects being undertaken in line with the medium-term plans, the budget outlook paper, and the medium-term expenditure framework.
During the life of the Vision, strategies and action plans are expected to be systematically reviewed and adjusted every 5 years in order to respond to the changing environment. Following the expiry of the ERS in December 2007, the first part of Vision 2030 is now being implemented under the 2008-2012 plan.
On July 23, 2013 the Ministry of Information and Communication launched the National Broadband Strategy, with the stated goal "Broadband connectivity that is always on and that delivers a minimum of 5mbps to homes and businesses for high speed access to voice, data, video and applications for development."


== Vision Delivery Secretariat ==
The Kenyan Government has created a Vision Delivery Secretariat (VDS), which provides leadership and direction to realize the Vision 2030 goals. The Secretariat is managed by the Director-General under guidance of the Vision 2030 Delivery Board that plays an advisory role.


== References ==


== External links ==
Vision 2030 - Official website
Vision 2030; National Economic and Social Council