Ganga Prasad

Ganga Prasad is an Indian politician who is currently the Governor of the state of Sikkim and former Governor of Meghalaya. He was member of  Bihar legislative council and served as leader of opposition during the RJD regime. He also held the post of leader of Bihar legislative council during the NDA rule in Bihar. He got associated with Jan Sangh and remained associated to the same ideology till date. He is an ardent follower of Arya Samaj and served as Pradhan (Head) of the Bihar Arya Samaj Pratinidhi Sabha unit. He is popularly known as 'Ganga Babu' in the political circle.
Born in a Business family his father Late Mundar Sah (Aged 109 yrs) was a successful entrepreneur who coordinated with people from the states of east India and Bangladesh for his business mostly thorough correspondence. Mr. Sah was socially very active. He became the Mukhiya (Chief) of his location (Khajpura) for 2 terms, which is now part of the Patna Municipal Corporation. Sri Mundar Sah realized the importance of politics in the state of Bihar and thus pushed Mr. Prasad towards politics and could match the ideology with that of Jan Sangh.
Mr. Prasad was the chairman of Dadhichi Dehdaan Samiti, Bihar chapter, an organisation for promoting voluntary organ donation.
His eldest son Arun Kumar is a businessman and his 2nd son Sanjeev Chaurasia, is a BJP MLA from Digha constituency in Patna district. His 3rd son Deepak Chaurasia was ward councilor from ward no.2 of Patna Municipal corporation for three terms but later that ward got reserved as women seat, then his wife Madhu Chaurasia stood and got elected as the councilor after Mr. Prasad's insistence. His Son in law Sri Umesh Kumar, IPS (Karnataka cadre), is IG Mysore. His daughter is a businesswoman. And his youngest son is into IT.


== Career ==
Prasad was elected to the Legislative Council of Bihar in 1994 and had been a member for 18 years since then.On 30 September 2017, Prasad was appointed by President Ram Nath Kovind as the new Governor of Meghalaya.On 26 August 2018, Prasad was sworn in as the 16th Governor of Sikkim, replacing Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil.


== Early Political Career ==
1966 - Inspired by the ideology of Shri Shyama Pd. Mukherjee & Pt. Dindayal Upadhaya he joined the political party Jan Sangh.
1967 - He unsuccessfully contested assembly election from Danapur constituency in Bihar.
1968 - He became the Maha Mantri of Jan Sangh of Patna district.
1969 - Mr. Prasad again fought the assembly election from Danapur but could not make it to the assembly.
1972 - He was appointed as General Secretary of Bihar Pradesh Badhai Mahasabha.
1974 - During the protest for the inflation before emergency he was arrested, his scooter/vehicles were confiscated.
1975 - He absconded his arrest during emergency. But after Kurki Japti (confiscation of assets) he had to surrender. He was left on parole due to flood that time. During the emergency 'Arya Bhawan' his house used to be the hub for all the Jan Sangh and RSS leaders as residence/hiding point and meeting point.
1977 - After the emergency was lifted, the first OTC of RSS was held at Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Patna, all the Sangh’s National Padadhikaris (officeholder) stayed at his residence 'Arya Bhawan'. B P Koirala also came to his residence to meet Balasaheb Deoras.
At the same time top dignitaries from Arya Samaj ( Pradhan- Ram Gopal Shalwale), (Mantri- Om Prakash Tyagi) stayed at his residence for the work of Arya Samaj and also coincidentally met Balasaheb.
During everyone’s stay, his father late Mundar sah used to monitor everyone’s hospitality and make sure no one had any problem.
1979 - Bihar Vaishya Parishad Organised an event for which Karpoori Thakur inaugurated the ceremony and Mr Prasad was the Swag Adhyach (Welcoming Chief).
1980 - When BJP was formed he became the Nidhi Pramukh of BJP Bihar chapter. He is considered as one of the first few members of BJP in Bihar.
1985 - He again tried his luck from Danapur constituency on BJP ticket but couldn't succeed. During the election campaign many leaders came to Danapur. Prof Sukhada Pandey gave a very mesmerizing and inspiring speech which was noticed by the central team.


== References ==