Snowdome Adelaide

The IceArenA is an ice sports and public skate centre, opened on 17 September 1981 as the Ice Arena and located in Thebarton, Adelaide, South Australia. The IceArenA is South Australia’s premier ice skating facility located just minutes from the Adelaide CBD. The centre is the home of Adelaide Adrenaline (AIHL), Adelaide Rush (AWIHL) and Adelaide Generals (AJIHL).


== History ==
1981 - 
The centre first opened in 1981 as the Ice Arena with a full size skating rink surrounded by a speed skating track. 1987 -
In late 1987, the centre closed for the construction of the world's first indoor ski slope and reopened in 1988 as Mt Thebarton Snow and Ice, featuring what was reported to be the world's first indoor ski slope on artificial snow. 
To accommodate the new structure supporting the ski-slope and to make room for the bottom of the slope, the concentric skating rink concept was abandoned and replaced by two ice skating rinks (one large 56×26m rink and one smaller 30×15m surface). 
The centre underwent a further name change to Snowdome Adelaide. 2005 -
The facility temporarily closed in June 2005 due to the running costs of the centre, but it re-opened minus the indoor ski slope with the new name of IceArenA.2016 -
4 March 2016, the Large Ice was closed due to issues with the pipe works under the large ice. 
Media release states that IceArenA are in discussions with the government.
7 May 2016, the Large Ice reopened, with various dignitaries in attendance, after a government grant was provided to purchase a new, modern refrigeration plant.


== Events ==
The venue offers a wide variety of activities including ice hockey lessons, ice skating lessons, snow play sessions, school holiday skating, birthday parties, public skating sessions, and it is also the home venue of the Adelaide Adrenaline ice hockey men's and women's teams.


== See also ==
List of ice rinks in Australia
Sport in South Australia


== References ==


== External links ==
IceArenA official site
IceArenA Facebook
Ice Skating Australia