Udayana

Udayana University (Indonesian: Universitas Udayana, abbreviated as UNUD) is a public university in Denpasar, Bali, Indonesia. It was established on September 29, 1962 and it used to belong to the Airlangga University that mainly located in Surabaya. Its current rector is Prof. Dr. A.A. Raka Sudewi, Sp.S(K). The university's name was derived from the 10th century Balinese King Udayana (Dharmodayana) of the Warmadewa Dynasty.Based on official data released by the Ministry of Research, Technology and Higher Education of Indonesia (Kemenristekdikti), Udayana University is ranked 57th. The ranking released by Kemenristekdikti is based on four indicators, those are: the quality of human resources, quality of management, the variety of student activities, quality of research and publications. Moreover, based on international university ranking data released by UniRank through its website, Udayana University is ranked 2128th in the world, and 36th in Inonesia.
Udayana University obtained accreditation "A" status (the highest), where there are three levels of status, namely A, B and C, that awarded by the National Accreditation Board of Higher Education (Indonesian: Badan Akrediasi Nasional Perguruan Tinggi, abbreviated as BAN-PT).


== History ==

Udayana University was established by the Act of Minister of Higher Education Republic of Indonesia No.104/1962, on 9 August 1962, after an initial period as part of Airlangga University since 29 September 1958. It was the first university to be established in Bali Province. With four courses in 1962. In 1975, several faculties such as faculty of law, faculty of engineering, faculty of agriculture and faculty of economy was established. As of 2017, Udayana University have 13 faculties with faculty of marine and fisheries is the newest faculty was established in 2011.


== Faculties ==
The program offered in Udayana University relatively comprehensive in the science major programs. The programs offered in the Udayana University is one of the most comprehensive programs in Indonesia.The university has 13 faculties:


== Campuses ==


=== Nias Campus ===
Nias Street in Denpasar was the original campus of Udayana University which was established in 1958. On this campus, situated the fabulous Statue of Saraswati, the Goddess of Knowledge, a monument for love of science and technology. It is now home for the Faculty of Letters and postgraduate programs (Masters and Doctorate) of Cultural Studies.


=== Sudirman Campus ===
Sudirman campus is in the heart of Denpasar, in easy distance of major sights. It is home to postgraduate programs and Medical Sciences faculty. The early days of the campus saw a field of palm trees planted along the front corridor, making the campus known as “Campus of Palm” (Indonesian: Kampus Palma).
The campus has grown in number and facilities. It includes the Global Development Learning Network (GDLN) Building, an information and communication technology building that facilitates students for working and strengthens connections. It also allows all university students to access distance tutorials and conferences.


=== Bukit Jimbaran Campus ===

Built in 1986, this is relatively a new campus and is the largest of Udayana’s three campuses. It is designed like a town. Facilities include health clinic, university library, sport center, post office, guesthouse and university housing. An international hospital, shopping center, lake and leisure facilities are being made available soon.The campus is not far from Pecatu, in easy reach of Ngurah Rai International Airport and the major tourism sites of Kuta and Nusa Dua.


== Notable alumni ==
Rui Maria de Araújo, Prime Minister of East Timor
Prof. Dr. I Wayan Bawa, professor in dialectology at Udayana University
I Dewa Gede Palguna, Justice, Constitutional Court of Indonesia
Luh Ketut Suryani, Psychiatry
I Gede Ngurah Swajaya, Indonesian Ambassador to the Republic of Singapore
Putu Agus Suradnyana, a politician, advocate, previously elected as a member of People's Representative Council for the period 2009-2014
I Gede Pasek Suardika S.T., Buleleng Regent who served in the period 2012-2017
Dr. H. Adirozal, M.Si., Kerinci Regent, previously served as Deputy Mayor of Padang Panjang


== References ==


== External links ==
Official site