Virginia International University

Virginia International University (VIU) is a private, non-profit institution established in 1998.  Located in Fairfax, Virginia, VIU offers degree programs at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, as well as language programs like English as a Second Language (ESL), and continuing education opportunities. The university is nationally accredited by the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools and approved to operate by the State Council of Higher Education for Virginia.


== History ==
Virginia International University was founded by Dr. Isa Sarac in 1998.  Subsequent to establishing its campus in Fairfax, Virginia, VIU received authorization from the State Council of Higher Education for Virginia (SCHEV) to begin its first Master of Business Administration (MBA) program on December 23, 1998.By May 2000, SCHEV granted the university the authority to offer a series of Diploma and Certificate programs, grant degrees for the MBA program, and gave the university permission to begin a baccalaureate program in Computer Science and Business Management.
VIU held its first commencement on May 4, 2006 with 20 graduates in attendance at the Fairfax County Country Club and has rapidly grown in student population since then. Today, VIU boasts students from 60 different countries and offers a variety of both academic and non-academic degrees on campus and online.In the fall of 2018, SCHEV staff audited VIU and recommended that the council revoke the university's certificate to operate. The audit "found numerous concerns about the quality of the online courses it reviewed [and] state[d] that 'the single most important factor contributing to the substandard quality of online education at VIU is the institution’s acceptance of international students with an abysmally poor command of the English language. This is especially true for graduate level programs.'" The council subsequently accepted the staff recommendation and began the process of revoking the university's certificate to operate.In 2019 VIU reached a consent agreement with the State of Virginia to continue operating, but it must not offer online courses for at least three years.


== Faculty ==
Faculty numbers in 2016-17 were 10 full-time instructors and 92 part-time instructors. 


== Academics ==
Virginia International University's programs are organized into seven schools: the School of Business, School of Computer Information Systems, School of Continuing Education, School of Education, School of Public and International Affairs, School of Language Studies and School of Online Education.


=== School of Business (SB) ===
VIU's School of Business offers an MBA program which includes instruction in foundational core business courses, a set of required business courses to provide depth, and electives.  Concentrations include: Accounting, Entrepreneurship, Global Logistics, Health Care Management, Hospitality & Tourism Management, Human Resource Management, International Business Management, International Finance, Marketing Management, Mass Media and Public Relations, or Project Management.
The following graduate degrees and certificates are also offered within the School of Business: Master of Science in Accounting, Master of Science in Project Management, Graduate Certificate in Project Management.
The BBA program includes a liberal arts foundation, a core curriculum in business, and electives.  Concentrations include: Finance, International Business, and Marketing.
The following undergraduate certificate programs are also offered within the School of Business: International Business and Small Business Management.


=== School of Computer Information Systems (SCIS) ===
The School of Computer Information Systems at VIU offers graduate, undergraduate, and certificate programs.  These programs include:  Master in Computer Science (MCS), Master in Information Systems (MIS), Master in Information Systems Management (MISM), Master in Information Technology (MIT), Master in Software Engineering (MSE), Bachelor of Science in Computer Science, Graduate Certificate in Business Intelligence, Graduate Certificate in Information Systems, Graduate Certificate in Information Systems Management, Graduate Certificate in Information Technology Audit & Compliance.
Concentrations include: 

Computer Animation & Gaming
Cybersecurity
Data Management
Intelligent Systems
Networking
Software Applications Development
Software Engineering
Business Intelligence & Data Analytics
Enterprise Project Management
Health Informatics
Information Assurance
Knowledge Management


=== School of Education (SED) ===
The School of Education offers the following degrees:

Master of Arts in TESOL (MA in TESOL)
Graduate Certificate in TESOL
Master of Science in Applied Linguistics with concentrations in Multilingual Education, Program Administration, and Educational Technology.
Master of Education in Secondary Education with concentrations in English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL), Mathematics, and Science.The SED focuses on the development of professionals both inside and outside of the classroom including a Voices from the Field speaker series.


=== School of Public and International Affairs (SPIA) ===
The School of Public & International Affairs offers two master's-level programs: Master of Science in International Relations (MIR) and Master of Public Administration (MPA). The MIR program focuses on the study of foreign policy and international development and business. The MPA degree is designed to prepare students for careers in public management and local, state, and federal administration. Both programs provide students with the skills to pursue careers with state and local governments, international organizations, non-profit organizations, multinational corporations, news outlets, and policy research institutions.


=== School of Language Studies (SLS) ===
The School of Language Studies at VIU includes two tracks to help develop and improve upon a student's English proficiency: intensive ESL (focusing on academic English and IELTS or TOEFL test preparation) and non-intensive ESL (e.g., business English, advanced speaking, TOEFL preparation).


== Student life ==
445 students are enrolled at Virginia International University as of 2016-17. 


== Other ==
VIU ceased its online offerings in 2019 following a consent agreement with SCHEV. 


== References ==