This Is the Day (album)

The Big Day is the debut studio album by American rapper Chance the Rapper, released on July 26, 2019. The album follows several mixtapes by the rapper including the reissue of his collaborative Merry Christmas Lil' Mama in 2017, and is his first solo project since Coloring Book in 2016. The album was influenced by Chance's marriage, which occurred in March 2019. The album received generally positive reviews from critics, but received backlash from fans on social media. The album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200, Chance's highest-charting entry to date.


== Background ==
In a November 2016 interview, Chance the Rapper stated: "I think what I'm working on now is an album." In March 2017, Chance stated that he would sell his debut album, as opposed to the free release of his previous mixtapes.In May and June 2018, American rapper and producer Kanye West released a set of 7-track albums as part of the Wyoming Sessions, producing five albums in collaboration with Pusha T, Kid Cudi, Nas, and Teyana Taylor. In July 2018, Chance announced that West was coming to Chicago to produce his debut album. West arrived in Chicago in mid-August 2018 and began recording. The duo later announced that their collaboration would be titled Good Ass Job. At the same time, West began working on his ninth studio album Yandhi and shifted his focus to that project instead; West has no production credits on the released version of The Big Day.
On February 12, 2019, Chance tweeted "July" and shared a video on his Instagram revealing that he had "been making music" that fans could expect to arrive the same month.


== Themes and narrative ==
The album follows Chance on his wedding day, as he was married to Kirsten Corley in March 2019. The album is family-centric, with most songs speaking about Kirsten and Chance's family and children, and features contributions from his brother Taylor Bennett, who raps on "Roo", and his father Ken Bennett, who helped co-write "Eternal". In the skits "Photo Ops" and "4 Quarters in the Black", comedians John Witherspoon and Keith David play wise uncle characters to highlight the multigenerational aspect of weddings.


== Promotion ==
On June 27, 2019, Chance released a promotional video titled "The Next Chapter Begins", where a pre-order for the album was launched. His first two mixtapes, 10 Day and Acid Rap, were also put up on music streaming services, and sold on vinyl alongside his third mixtape Coloring Book.Chance the Rapper announced the album's title, release date and revealed its cover during his interview on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on July 16, 2019.


== Critical reception ==
At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album has an average score of 71 based on 21 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Al Horner of The Guardian described the album as "a candid, cutesy concept album based around his wedding", believing the album "combines something old and something new, subtly expanding Chance’s sound without ever straying too far from the sentimental gospel-pop heart of his last release, Coloring Book." Fred Thomas of AllMusic wrote that "Bright, flawless production supports Chance's optimistic lyrics and cultivates an atmosphere overflowing with joy, wonder, and summery nostalgia." Christopher Weingarten of Entertainment Weekly concluded: "A master lyricist, a musical omnivore, Chance and his family of producers and instrumentalists channel all the big emotions of the big day in a swirl of bliss, marital and otherwise."In a mixed review, Danny Schwartz of Rolling Stone concluded that "Despite its length, The Big Day is self-contained, at least by Chance’s standards", considering it "narrower in emotional scope" than the 2016 mixtape Coloring Book. Dhruva Balram of NME believed The Big Day is "a buoyant, cheerful project that looks back on his young, successful career through rose-tinted lenses but, ultimately, doesn't possess enough depth amidst a mishmash of production and features that make it too long-winded."The album and Chance received criticism from fans on social media, spawning many Internet memes primarily about the album's focus on Chance's marriage. Some fans also had expected content reminiscent of his earlier releases and believed that the album did not meet up to said expectations. Music reviewer Anthony Fantano gave the album a rare zero rating out of ten. Chance responded on Twitter to the criticism that he believes that people want him to "kill himself".


== Commercial performance ==
The Big Day debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 with 108,000 album-equivalent units, of which 27,000 were pure album sales. It is Chance the Rapper's third US top 10 album.


== Track listing ==
Track listing and credits adapted from Apple Music and Tidal.
Notes

"Photo Ops (Skit)" features uncredited vocals by John Witherspoon
"Ballin Flossin" features uncredited vocals by DJ Casper
"4 Quarters in the Black (Skit)" features uncredited vocals by Keith David
"Found a Good One (Single No More)" features uncredited vocals by Lisa Mishra
"Our House (Skit)" features uncredited vocals by Cree Summer and Jackée HarrySamples

^[a]  "We Go High" contains a voice sample of the character Navi, voiced by Kaori Mizuhashi, from The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time; and a vocal sample of a performance by Mike Servin.
^[b]  "Handsome" contains a sample from "Honesty", written by David Bowden, and performed by Pink Sweats.
^[c]  "Ballin Flossin" contains a sample from "I Wanna Be Down", written by Keith Edward Crouch, and performed by Brandy.
^[d]  "Get a Bag" contains a sample from "Only One", written and performed by James Taylor.
^[e]  "Zanies and Fools" contains a sample from "Impossible: It's Possible" from Cinderella, written by Oscar Hammerstein II and Richard Rodgers, and performed by Rodgers.


== Charts ==


== Release history ==


== References ==