Sir John Garrard, 1st Baronet (page does not exist)

Former pupils of Winchester College are known as Old Wykehamists, in memory of the school's founder, William of Wykeham. They include the following individuals, classified by century of birth, with a note of how each distinguished himself.
Lists of Old Wykehamists who won medals, and characters in fiction are included at the foot of the page. See also The Category for Old Wykehamists.


== Fourteenth century ==

Henry Chichele, Archbishop of Canterbury
Thomas Beckington, statesman


== Fifteenth century ==
Thomas Chaundler, playwright and illustrator
Richard Pace, diplomat
William Horman, translator
William Grocyn, scholar
William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury
Hugh Inge, Archbishop of Dublin
Richard Risby, friar


== Sixteenth century ==

Henry Cole, Roman Catholic priest
Nicholas Udall, Headmaster of Eton and playwright
Henry Garnett, Jesuit plotter
John White, Bishop
Nicholas Harpsfield, Roman Catholic apologist
Richard Reade, Lord Chancellor of Ireland
Nicholas Sanders, Roman Catholic priest, missionary and historian
Thomas Bilson, Bishop
John Harmar, Warden of Winchester College, one of the translators of the Authorised Version of the Bible
John Owen, Welsh epigrammatist
Henry Wotton, author and diplomat
Arthur Lake, Bishop
John Davies, poet
Thomas James, librarian
Thomas Coryat, travel writer, court jester to James I
Henry Marten, Judge of Admiralty
Sir Thomas Ryves, lawyer
Richard Zouch, judge and politician
Edward Nicholas, statesman


== Seventeenth century ==
Nathaniel Fiennes, Roundhead politician
Thomas Ken, bishop, non-juror and hymnwriter
Francis Turner, bishop and non-juror
Thomas Otway, dramatist
Sir Thomas Browne, doctor, polymath, scholar, prose stylist
Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury, politician and author
William Somervile, poet
Edward Young, poet


== Eighteenth century ==

Robert Lowth, Bishop of London, Hebraist and English grammarian
William Whitehead, Poet Laureate
William Collins, poet
Joseph Warton, literary critic and Headmaster of Winchester
William Douglas, 4th Duke of Queensberry, famed rake and gambler
Thomas Warton, Poet Laureate
James Eyre (judge)
Charles Wolfran Cornwall, Speaker of the House of Commons
James Woodforde, clergyman and diarist
George Isaac Huntingford, Bishop of Hereford and Gloucester
Thomas Burgess, author
Henry Addington, 1st Viscount Sidmouth, Prime Minister
John Hawkins, geologist, traveller, and Fellow of the Royal Society
William Lisle Bowles, poet
William Howley, Archbishop of Canterbury
Sydney Smith, essayist and satirist
Richard Mant, Church of Ireland bishop and writer
John Colborne, 1st Baron Seaton, Field Marshal and colonial governor
William Buckland, theologian and geologist
William Ward, cricketer
John Bettesworth-Trevanion, MP
Thomas Arnold, headmaster of Rugby
Walter Farquhar Hook, Tractarian vicar of Leeds


== Nineteenth century ==


=== 1800–1819 ===
William Page Wood, 1st Baron Hatherley, Lord Chancellor
George Moberly, Headmaster of Winchester, later Bishop of Salisbury
Richard Clarke Sewell, lawyer
William Sewell, divine and author
Christopher Wordsworth, Bishop of Lincoln
Thomas Adolphus Trollope, author, brother of Anthony Trollope
James Edwards Sewell, Warden of New College, Oxford.
Robert Lowe, 1st Viscount Sherbrooke, statesman
William George Ward, prominent in the Oxford Movement
Thomas Oliphant musician and lyricist
William Monsell, 1st Baron Emly, Liberal politician
Roundell Palmer, 1st Earl of Selborne
Henry Maister, cricketer
Anthony Trollope, author


=== 1820–1839 ===

Matthew Arnold, poet
George Bruce Malleson, author
Frank Buckland, naturalist
James Dewar, cricketer and decorated Crimean War soldier
George Ridding, Headmaster of Winchester, later Bishop of Southwell
Henry Furneaux
William Tuckwell, Christian socialist clergyman and author of Reminiscences of Oxford
Samuel Rawson Gardiner, historian
Richard Bickerton Pemell Lyons, 2nd Baron Lyons, 1st Viscount and Earl Lyons, diplomat
Philip Lutley Sclater, lawyer, ornithologist (founder of Ibis), zoogeographer, Secretary of the ZSL for 42 years
Sir Ford North, Judge of the High Court of Justice and member of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
Ashley Eden, Colonial Administrator
Cecil Fiennes, cricketer
Philip Reginald Egerton, founder of Bloxham School
Arthur Faber, cricketer and headmaster of Malvern College
Wingfield Fiennes, cricketer


=== 1840–1859 ===

Herbert Stewart, soldier
Robert Campbell Moberly, theologian
Samuel Rolles Driver, Biblical scholar
Thomas Hughes, footballer who won the FA Cup twice in the 1870s
William Lindsay (1847–1923), England footballer and three times FA Cup winner
Leonard Howell (footballer) (1848–1895), Wanderers and England footballer
Charles Marriott (1848–1918), cricketer and barrister
Francis Birley (1850–1910), footballer who won the FA Cup three times in the 1870s
Charles Alfred Cripps, 1st Baron Parmoor, politician
John Bain (1854–1929), England footballer and 1877 FA Cup Finalist
Robert Campbell Moberly, academic
David Samuel Margoliouth, orientalist
William Palmer, 2nd Earl of Selborne, Lord Chancellor
Percival Parr, footballer and barrister


=== 1860–1869 ===

Francis J. Haverfield, historian of Roman Britain
Theodore Dyke Acland, surgeon and physician
Edward Grey, 1st Viscount Grey of Fallodon, Foreign Secretary 1905–16
Arthur Cayley Headlam, Principal of King's College London (1903–16) Bishop of Gloucester (1923–45)
Frederic G. Kenyon, classical scholar
Robert Laurie Morant, administrator and educator
Arthur Cobb, cricketer
John Beresford Leathes, physiologist
H. A. L. Fisher, historian, politician
Sir Arthur Pearson, 1st Baronet, newspaper magnate, founder of the Daily Express
Lionel Johnson, poet
William Sealy Gosset, statistician with Guinness (inventor of Student's t-test)
Frederic Thesiger, 1st Viscount Chelmsford
Claud Schuster, 1st Baron Schuster, Permanent Secretary to the Lord Chancellor 1915–1944
General Sir Reginald Byng Stephens, soldier
Ponsonby Ogle (1855–1902), British writer and journalist
Ernest Makins, soldier, statesman and politician


=== 1870–1879 ===

Bernard Granville Baker, soldier, author, military artist
Lord Alfred 'Bosie' Douglas, poet and companion of Oscar Wilde
Montague John Druitt, suspected of being Jack the Ripper
Edmund Fellowes, musicologist, clergyman
Thomas Case, cricketer and brewer
Udny Yule, statistician
Sir Edmund Backhouse, "The Hermit of Peking"
William Case, cricketer
Sir Vyner Brooke, Rajah of Sarawak
Ewart Grogan, explorer and colonist
Rupert D'Oyly Carte, Savoy Opera producer, hotelier
Major-General Sir Harold Goodeve Ruggles-Brise, cricketer and soldier
G. H. Hardy FRS, mathematician and mentor of Ramanujan
Robert Lock Graham Irving, schoolmaster, writer and mountaineer
G. E. M. Skues, pioneer of fly fishing with nymphs
Henry Howard, 19th Earl of Suffolk, peer
Edward Grigg, 1st Baron Altrincham, colonial administrator and politician
Alan Reynolds, cricketer and soldier
Sir Alfred Eckhard Zimmern, Zionist historian and political scientist


=== 1880–1889 ===

Maurice Bonham-Carter, politician and cricketer
Boyd Merriman, 1st Baron Merriman, politician
Hugh Dowding, 1st Baron Dowding, Battle of Britain commander
Archibald Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell, Field-Marshal and Viceroy of India
Adam Fox, theologian
Vincent Stow, cricketer
Clarence Bruce, 3rd Baron Aberdare, British peer
Robert Hamilton Moberly, bishop
Charles Malan, postmaster-general of the United Provinces.
Frederic John Napier Thesiger, 1st Viscount Chelmsford, Colonial Governor and Viceroy of India
George Mallory, climber on Mount Everest
Sir William Reginald Halliday, Principal of King's College London (1928–1952)
Apsley Cherry-Garrard Member of Captain Scott's expedition of 1912
Howell Moore-Gwyn, cricketer and soldier
Arthur Stanley-Clarke, first-class cricketer and soldier
Roundell Palmer, 3rd Earl of Selborne, politician
Denis Pritt, barrister and politician
Basil Brooke, 1st Viscount Brookeborough, Prime Minister of Northern Ireland
Charles Bewley, Irish diplomat
Guy Pawson, cricketer
John Crommelin-Brown, schoolmaster, poet and cricketer
Christopher Dawson, Roman Catholic historian
Arnold J. Toynbee, historian
Sir Stafford Cripps, Labour politician
Geoffrey Toye, composer and conductor
Armstrong Gibbs, composer


=== 1890–1899 ===

Sir Alan Herbert, humorist and law reformer
John William Fisher Beaumont, Chief Justice of The Bombay High Court
Walter Parke (1891–1914), cricketer and soldier
Spencer Leeson, Headmaster and bishop
Godfrey Rolles Driver, Biblical scholar
Olaf Caroe, writer and colonial administrator
Charles Portal, 1st Viscount Portal of Hungerford, Marshal of the Royal Air Force
George MacLeod, Very Rev Lord MacLeod of Fuinary, Moderator (1957), Church of Scotland
Sir Oswald Mosley, British fascist leader
Maxwell Woosnam, Olympic and Wimbledon lawn tennis champion and England national football team captain
Sir Eric Maclagan, Director of the Victoria and Albert Museum
Robert Nichols, war poet
Malcolm Trustram Eve, 1st Baron Silsoe, barrister
A. G. Macdonell, author, journalist and playwright
Gilbert Ashton, cricketer and schoolmaster
Percy Bates, shipbuilder and Inkling
Sir John Alexander Sinclair,  CB OBE, former Head of the Secret Intelligence Service (MI6)
Edward Wyndham Tennant, war poet
Ronald Tree, Conservative MP and founder of Sandy Lane, Barbados
Jack White, Trade Union organizer, Irish republican and socialist who co-founded the Irish Citizens Army
Henry Mond, 2nd Baron Melchett, industrialist
Gerard Wallop, 9th Earl of Portsmouth, landowner, writer and politician linked to far-right groups
Hubert Ashton, footballer, cricketer and politician
Ralph Williams, cricketer and barrister


== Twentieth century ==


=== 1900–1909 ===

Douglas Jardine, cricketer
John Firth, cricketer, clergyman and schoolmaster
David Eccles, 1st Viscount Eccles, politician
Cecil Harmsworth King, newspaper publisher
Mark Patten, Scottish cricketer
Lancelot Joynson-Hicks, 3rd Viscount Brentford, politician
Claude Ashton, Essex cricketer and England footballer
Anthony Asquith, film director
E. E. Evans-Pritchard, anthropologist, author of Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azande
Francis Festing, Field Marshal
Nowell Myres, archaeologist
John Dring, Prime Minister of Bahawalpur
George D'Oyly Snow, headmaster of Ardingly College and Bishop of Whitby
Charles Bosanquet, Academic
Patrick Balfour, 3rd Baron Kinross, writer
John Snagge, World War II BBC announcer
William Goodenough Hayter, diplomat, ambassador and Warden of New College, Oxford
Roger Makins, 1st Baron Sherfield, ambassador
Charles Francis Christopher Hawkes, archaeologist
Charles Awdry, cricketer, British Army officer, High Sheriff of Wiltshire
Gerry Fiennes, railway manager
Edward Younger, 3rd Viscount Younger of Leckie, Brewer
John Sparrow, literary critic and Warden of All Souls
William Empson, literary critic
Hugh Gaitskell, leader of the Labour Party
Richard Wilberforce, Baron Wilberforce, Law Lord
Richard Crossman, Labour politician and diarist
Douglas Jay, Baron Jay, Labour politician
Kenneth Younger, Labour MP
Charles Scott Moncrieff, translator of Proust
Edward Williams, army officer, cricketer
Sir Basil Goulding, 3rd Baronet, sportsman and art collector
Evelyn Shuckburgh, diplomat
Douglas Dodds-Parker, soldier and politician


=== 1910–1919 ===

Nicholas Monsarrat, naval officer, diplomat and author of The Cruel Sea
Thomas Mervyn Horder, 2nd Baron Horder, publisher.
Sir John Stephenson, Lord Justice of Appeal
Roger Tredgold, fencer and psychiatrist
Ralph George Scott Bankes, barrister and Diocesan Chancellor
John Darwall-Smith, cricketer
Sir John Pringle, zoologist
Bruce Campbell, ornithologist, writer and broadcaster
Charles Madge, poet and Communist
Basil William Robinson, Asian art scholar and author
Gilbert White, soldier and cricketer
Roger Winlaw, Cambridge University and Surrey cricketer
Basil Martin Wright, inventor of the Peak flow meter
Christopher Dilke, writer
Arthur Lionel Pugh Norrington, President of Trinity College, Oxford and originator of the Norrington Table
Shaun Wylie, mathematician and World War II Enigma and Tunny codebreaker
Robert Irving, conductor
Richard Synge, Nobel prize winning biochemist
Lord Aldington, politician and businessman
Stormont Mancroft, 2nd Baron Mancroft, government minister
John Grover, cricketer
Kenneth Clark, art historian and broadcaster
John Drennan Eggar, schoolmaster and cricketer
Colin Clark, economist and statistician
Archibald Wavell, 2nd Earl Wavell, soldier
Robert Conquest, historian specialising in Joseph Stalin's purges
Monty Woodhouse, Philhellene and politician
Julian Faber, businessman
Sir Derrick Bailey, businessman, cricketer
James Joll, historian
Willie Whitelaw, politician
George Jellicoe, aka Viscount Brocas, soldier-statesman, businessman-diplomat
M. R. D. Foot, historian
Morys Bruce, 4th Baron Aberdare, Conservative politician
Rev George Snow, Bishop and educator


=== 1920–1929 ===

Lord Brandon, Law Lord
Frank Thompson, SOE officer
Anthony Storr, psychiatrist and author
John Latham, artist
Horace Barlow, neuroscientist
Tony Pawson, cricketer
Paul Britten Austin, translator of Swedish literature
Peter Fowler, physicist working on elementary particles
Hugh Beach, soldier, researcher into disarmament and ethics of war
Freeman Dyson, physicist and mathematician
H. Christopher Longuet-Higgins, theoretical chemist and cognitive scientist
Geoffrey Warnock, philosopher and academic
Michael Carver, Baron Carver, soldier and philosopher
Sir James Lighthill, applied mathematician working on fluid dynamics
Daniel Awdry, politician
Michael Gow, General
D. G. Champernowne, economist and mathematician
Michael S. Longuet-Higgins, mathematician and oceanographer
Hubert Doggart cricketer and schoolmaster
Michael Dummett, philosopher
Sir John Balcombe, High Court judge
Geoffrey Howe, Lord Howe of Aberavon, politician
Alan Hopkins, Conservative MP
Ian Macdonald, mathematician
Martin Beale, applied mathematician and statistician
David Montgomery, 2nd Viscount Montgomery of Alamein, politician and businessman
Sir Jeremy Morse, banker and university chancellor
Mark Bonham Carter, publisher and politician
John Lucas, philosopher
Raymond Bonham Carter, banker
Robert Shirley, 13th Earl Ferrers, politician


=== 1930–1939 ===

Sir John Fiennes, lawyer and parliamentary draftsman
Alasdair Milne, BBC Director General
Jock Bruce-Gardyne, Conservative politician
Ian Buist, diplomat
David Trustram Eve, 2nd Baron Silsoe, lawyer
George Younger, 4th Viscount Younger of Leckie, politician
John Eccles, 2nd Viscount Eccles, peer and businessman
Reginald Bosanquet, ITN newscaster
Michael Scott, cricketer
Guy Antony Jameson, aeronautical engineer and mathematician
Geoffrey Stewart-Smith, politician, anti-communist
David Thouless, Nobel prizewinning physicist
Nicholas Mackintosh, experimental psychologist
William Donaldson, writer and satirist; creator of Henry Root
Julian Mitchell, writer
David Hannay, Baron Hannay of Chiswick, ambassador to the United Nations
Michael Howard, 21st Earl of Suffolk and Berkshire, landowner
Walter Lawrence, cricketer and former chairman of Lloyd's of London
Andrew Hichens, cricketer
Giles Radice, Baron Radice of Chester-le-Street, politician
Jonathan D. Spence, historian and sinologist
Brian Trubshaw, Concorde test pilot
John Albery, scientist
Ian Gow, politician
Paul Bergne, intelligence officer, linguist and diplomat
Peter Jay, economist, journalist and ambassador
Nicholas Luard, writer
Sir Jack Boles, Director-General of the National Trust
Iain Sproat, politician
Christopher Miles, film director


=== 1940–1949 ===

Anthony Gifford, 6th Baron Gifford, barrister
Richard Williamson, bishop
Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi, cricketer
Ambrose Greenway, 4th Baron Greenway, marine photographer
Shane Gough, 5th Viscount Gough, stockbroker
Richard Jefferson, cricketer
Tim Brooke-Taylor, comedian
Andrew Large, banker and businessman
Christopher Makins, 2nd Baron Sherfield, diplomat and author
David Soskice, political economist
Hugh Courtenay, 18th Earl of Devon, British peer
Mark Pellew, diplomat
Patrick Minford, economist
Hew Pike, General
Geoffrey Rowell, Bishop of Gibraltar in Europe
Andrew Longmore, Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal
Andro Linklater, writer
George Magan, Baron Magan of Castletown, businessman
Lord Jay of Ewelme, head of the Foreign Office

Antony Beevor, military historian
Richard Noble, designer of the ThrustSSC
Charles Sinclair, businessman and Warden since July 2014
David Clementi, financier and Warden from 2008-2014


=== 1950–1959 ===

Christopher Suenson-Taylor, 3rd Baron Grantchester, Labour peer
Tim Eggar, Conservative politician.
Anthony Pawson, scientist
Robyn Hitchcock, singer, songwriter
Alan Lovell, businessman
Francis Baring, 6th Baron Northbrook, Conservative peer
John Stevens, politician
Nicholas Shepherd-Barron, mathematician
Edward Jackson, cricketer
James Mallet, evolutionary zoologist
James Younger, 5th Viscount Younger of Leckie, peer and politician
Peter Bennett-Jones, TV producer and talent agent
Richard Stagg, ambassador
Nicholas Shakespeare, novelist and journalist
Michael Hofmann, poet
William Gaminara, actor
J.G. Sandom, author and interactive advertising pioneer
Francis Pott, composer and pianist
Jeremy Asher, businessman, investor and company director
John Whittingdale, Conservative MP
John Campbell, economist
Charles Low, 2nd Baron Aldington, peer
Seumas Milne, journalist
Jon Leyne, BBC foreign correspondent
James Bucknall, soldier
Peter Neyroud, police chief
Nick Carter, Chief of the General Staff


=== 1960–1969 ===

Japhet Asher, film and television producer
Patrick Gale, novelist
Edward Lucas, journalist
Adrian Adlam, violinist and conductor
Korn Chatikavanij, banker and politician, finance minister of Thailand
Joss Whedon, screenwriter and film director
Nick Boles, independent MP
Johnny Acton, writer and farmer


=== 1970–1979 ===

Saif Ali Khan, actor
Dominic Selwood, author and barrister
Marcus Fysh, Conservative MP
Alistair Potts, world champion cox
Rupert Wyatt, writer and film director
Simon Aldridge, artist
Simon Henderson, Headmaster of Eton College
Hugh Dancy, actor
Robin Saikia, author and actor


=== 1980–1989 ===
Alex Chalk, Conservative MP
Rishi Sunak, Conservative MP
Tom Hurndall, journalist
Archie Bland, journalist and editor
Anthony Smith, sculptor
Tom Sturridge, actor
Will Sharpe, actor
Charles Edwards, actor
George Nash, Olympic rower


== Victoria Cross and George Cross holders ==

Six Old Wykehamists have won the Victoria Cross (VC), four in the First World War, 1914–18 (of whom three were killed in action) and two prior to 1914. Also in the Second World War one Old Wykehamist won the George Cross in military circumstances and another Old Wykehamist won the George Medal in military circumstances.

Victoria Cross
Indian Mutiny
Lieutenant Alfred Spencer Heathcote VC (1832–1912) for his conduct during the Siege of Delhi
Boer War
Lieutenant Gustavus Hamilton Blenkinsopp Coulson VC DSO (1879–1901)
First World War
Captain Arthur Forbes Gordon Kilby VC, MC (1885–1915)
Second Lieutenant Dennis George Wyldbore Hewitt VC, (1897–1917)
Lieutenant Colonel Charles Hotham Montagu Doughty-Wylie VC, (1868–1915)
Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Burges VC, DSO, Croix de guerre avec Palme (1873–1946)
George Cross
Second World War
Sub-Lieutenant Peter Victor Danckwerts GC (1916–1984) for gallantry defusing mines dropped on London


== In fiction ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Badcock, C. F.; La Corrie, J. R. Winchester College: A Register for the Years 1930 To 1975. Winchester College, 1992.
Dilke, Christopher. Dr Moberly's Mint-Mark: A Study of Winchester College. London, 1965.
Firth, J. D'E. Winchester College. Winchester, 1961.
Lamb, L. H. Winchester College A Register 1915–1960. P. & G. Wells, 1974.
Leach, Arthur F. A History of Winchester College. London and New York, 1899.
Maclure, P. S. W. K.; Stevens, R. P. Winchester College, A Register. Winchester College, 2014.
Sabben-Clare, James. Winchester College. Paul Cave Publications, 1981.
Wainewright, John Bannerman (ed). Winchester College 1836–1906: A Register. P. and G. Wells, 1907.