UNI Airways

UNI Air (Chinese: 立榮航空; pinyin: Lìróng Hángkōng; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Lïp-êng Háng-khong) is a regional airline based in Zhongshan, Taipei, Taiwan. It is a domestic and regional subsidiary of EVA Air. It was known as Makung Airlines (馬公航空) until 1996, when EVA Air took a majority share of the airline. In 1998, the airline merged with Great China Airlines (大華航空) and Taiwan Airways (臺灣航空), which EVA Air also had interests in, to form UNI Airways (UNI Air).
The airline has had the largest market share in the domestic Taiwan market in recent years, and has expanded to include international flights. A few of its former McDonnell Douglas MD-90 and current ATR 72 aircraft were repainted and flew for parent carrier EVA Air due to overcapacity. In recent years, Uni Air has launched services to international destinations from the southern Taiwanese port city of Kaohsiung. In 2007, the airline received permission to begin flights to Japan.EVA Air stated in 2016 that it will merge with UNI Air to create one airline for the convenience of their passengers.


== General ==
UNI Air has operated two-class services, with domestic business- and economy-class seating. Business-class passengers have access to EVA Air's Evergreen Lounges. UNI Air's predecessor, Makung International Airlines, operated a fleet of BAe 146 series jet aircraft. These aircraft were sold when Uni Air was formed. Uni Air's IATA Code is B7, its ICAO code is UIA, and its callsign is Glory, in reference to its sister company Uniglory Shipping Corporation. In 2012, Uni Air unveiled a new livery and tail/logo on the MD-90 and its new ATR 72-600 aircraft.


== Destinations ==

The airline operates mainly to domestic and China destinations, but also operates scheduled international flights to Bangkok, Ho Chi Minh City and Seoul. Also chartered flights to Surabaya and Jeju from Kaohsiung. Uni Air's destinations are:
UNI Air also operates charter flights to Yonago, Okayama, Hakodate, Miyazaki, Koriyama, Nagasaki, Obihiro, and Asahikawa in Japan, as well as Seoul, Busan, and Jeju in South Korea for various tour groups.
UNI Air flights connect to the EVA Air network via Taipei and Kaohsiung, with service to over 40 international destinations worldwide.


=== Codeshare agreements ===
Uni Air has codeshare agreements with the following airlines:
Air China
EVA Air
Hainan Airlines
Shandong Airlines
Shenzhen Airlines


== Fleet ==

As of November 2019, the Uni Air fleet consists of the following aircraft:

The airline fleet previously included the following aircraft (as of April 2015):
Boeing 757-200
BAe 146-300
Bombardier Dash 8-Q200
Bombardier Dash 8-Q300
McDonnell Douglas MD-90-30


== Accidents and incidents ==
On 24 August 1999, Uni Air Flight 873, a McDonnell Douglas MD-90, landed at Hualien Airport and was rolling on Runway 21, when an explosion was heard in the front section of the passenger cabin, followed by smoke and then fire. The pilot immediately braked, brought the aircraft to a stop on the runway. Then, after deploying  the  evacuation slides and initiating an emergency passenger evacuation, the pilot proceeded to call the tower for help. Upon receiving this call, fire squads at both the Hualien Airport and the Air Force Wing rushed to the scene to extinguish the fire. The fire was eventually put out at 13:45. While the upper part of the fuselage was completely destroyed, 90 passengers plus the crew of 6 were safely evacuated. Casualties included 14 seriously injured passengers and another 14 that suffered minor injuries. Most of the injured passengers suffered burns. There was eventually one death. Fragments produced by the explosion struck 1 passenger.


== See also ==

List of companies of Taiwan
EVA Air
Chang Yung-fa
Evergreen Group


== References ==


== External links ==
UNI Air Official website
UNI Air Korea
EVA Air