Buendia railway station

Buendia was a station on the South Main Line ("Southrail") of the Philippine National Railways.  Like all PNR stations, this station is at grade.  The station was located at the corner of Gil Puyat Avenue (formerly named Buendia Avenue) and the South Luzon Expressway in Makati.
Buendia was the ninth station from Tutuban and is one of three stations serving Makati, the other two being Pasay Road and EDSA. It was permanently closed in favor of a newly constructed, more spacious Dela Rosa station located at the southern end of the former station.


== History ==
Buendia station was opened on November 24, 1975 as part of the 83rd Anniversary of the Philippine National Railways coincided with the double tracking from Paco to Pasay Road, the station was renovated from 1989 to 1990 for the Metrotren Commuter service.
During the Northrail-Southrail Linkage Project, the platforms were raised with renovation of the station area and formally reopened on July 14, 2009.
On September 8, 2017, the station was closed due to short platforms where four to five-car trains do not fit. A new station was built south of the former station.


== Nearby landmarks ==
The station is near the Cash and Carry Mall in Barangay Palanan and an SM Hypermarket on the other side of the South Luzon Expressway in Barangay San Isidro.  Further away from the station are Makati Cinema Square, Exportbank Plaza and the San Antonio, Pio Del Pilar and San Isidro national high schools. A cluster of Cityland condominiums is also located right behind the station.


== Transportation links ==
Buendia station is accessible by jeepneys and buses plying the Taft Avenue and South Luzon Expressway routes.  A terminal for San Antonio cycle rickshaws is located across the station on the other side of Gil Puyat Avenue, while Pio del Pilar cycle rickshaws also drop commuters off at the station.
The station was located roughly midway between Buendia MRT Stations at the intersection with Epifanio de los Santos Avenue and Gil Puyat LRT Station at the intersection with Taft Avenue.


== Station Layout ==