Sir John A. Macdonald Secondary School (Hamilton, Ontario)

Sir John A. Macdonald Secondary is the largest high school in the Hamilton-Wentworth District School Board. The school opened in 1970 and presently has an enrollment of 1250 students. The student body represents over 80 countries of origin and has over 50 different native languages. The school has a state-of-the-art auditorium that seats 750 people. The school is located at 130 York Boulevard, Hamilton, Ontario, close to the city Public Library and across the street from the Copps Coliseum and Lloyd D. Jackson Square Mall.


== History ==
Sir John A. Macdonald Secondary School was opened in 1970 to replace Hamilton's Central Secondary School.  The school is named after former Canadian Prime Minister, Sir John A. Macdonald.  It became a semestered school in 1976.
Currently, there are students from over 80 different countries who attend the school, with over 50 different languages being their native dialects.  The school offers a variety of different programs, tailored to different areas of interest.


== Program highlights and student support programs ==
Special Art Program: The Special Art Program at Sir John A. Macdonald is the oldest magnet program in the city with its origins dating back to the Hamilton Art School in the late 1800s.  This tradition has produced many artists, including A.J. Casson and J.E.H. Macdonald of the Group of Seven.  The program continues to help students gain entry to post secondary art programs at colleges and universities and currently has many former grads at institutions like Sheridan College and Ontario College of Art and Design.
WOW-World of Work:  WOW focuses on the skills and knowledge required for a career in the retail industry.
Restaurant Hospitality Pathway:  The Restaurant Hospitality pathway program focuses on the skills and knowledge required for a career in the restaurant industry.
Web Design and Computer Game Design Technologies:  This program teaches skills and knowledge required for a career in web design or computer game design.
Applied Design - Portfolio Program:  This courses offers students the opportunity to up-grade studio skills or expand their existing portfolio after graduating from their home school.
Team Games Sport-Specific Program:  This program allows students to focus on sport specific skills necessary for either volleyball, or basketball or soccer.
Native Studies and Arts Program:  The Native Studies and Arts program offers aboriginal and non-aboriginal students an opportunity to study native culture, issues and arts.
After School Literacy Program: Established to help prepare students for the OSSLT with special emphasis placed on ESL students and students new to the standardized testing format.
Memorial Bursary Program: Financial assistance program established to assist students who demonstrate good attendance and commitment to academics.
Credit Recovery Programs: System and Alter Ed credit recovery programs for junior and senior students who have experienced academic failure in the past.
ESL Reading Buddies: The program is designed to assist ESL students with their reading skills while fostering leadership skills in senior students.
ESL Student Welcoming Committee: A program that introduces SJAM extracurricular activities to ESL grade 9 students by senior student mentors with teacher support.
Homework Club: After-school program that provides academic assistance for all grades with special emphasis on grade 9 and ESL students.
Nutrition Program: Ensures all our students have access to proper nutrition by providing breakfast and lunch for students who require assistance.
NYA:WEH: Aboriginal Stay In School initiative
Traditional Drum & Dance Program: An after-school program that introduces students to the traditional art of aboriginal drumming and dance.
PLACES: In-school Alternative Education and Credit Recovery Program
SHAE: Aboriginal Alternative Education School at the Hamilton Regional Indian Centre
SISO: On-site counsellors provide services to populations of newcomers with language needs.
Walk in Closet: Program that allows students access to clothing, personal hygiene products and school supplies.


== Clubs ==
Art Club & Arts Festival
Breakfast Club
Business Education Awards
Canadian Blood Services
Cheerleaders
Chess Club/Chess Team
Choir
Communications Club
C.P.R. Training
DECA
Drug and Alcohol Education
Environmental/Hiking Club/Recycling
First Aid Committee
Grad Committee
Grad Gown Committee
History Club
Home Page Club
Knitter’s Club
Mac Shack
Macdonald Athletic Council
Math Awards Luncheon
Math Contests
Needy Student Fund
New York Art Trip
Ontario Youth Apprenticeship Program
OSAID (Ontario Students Against Impaired Driving)
Photography Club
Radio Station - Morning Announcements
Stage Crew
United Way
Visa Club
Walk – In Closet
Yearbook
Badminton
Badminton Club
Baseball
Basketball, Jr. - Boys
Basketball, Sr. - Boys
Basketball, Jr. - Girls
Basketball, Sr. - Girls
Cross Country
Fitness Club (Weight Room)
Football, Tackle
Football, Touch - Boys
Football, Touch - Girls
Slo Pitch - Girls
Soccer - Girls (Outdoor)
Soccer Club - Girls (Indoor)
Soccer, Sr. - Boys
Soccer, Indoor - Sr.
Table Tennis
Tennis
Volleyball, Sr. - Boys
Volleyball, Jr. - Girls
Volleyball, Sr. - Girls
Volleyball Club
Wrestling, Boys


== See also ==
List of high schools in Ontario


== External links ==
Sir John A. Macdonald Secondary School
Sir John A. Macdonald School profile