Ukrainian Helsinki Group

The Ukrainian Helsinki Group (Ukrainian: Українська Гельсінська Група) was founded on November 9, 1976 as the "Ukrainian Public Group to Promote the Implementation of the Helsinki Accords on Human Rights" (Ukrainian: Українська громадська група сприяння виконанню гельсінських угод, romanized: Ukrayins'ka hromads'ka hrupa spryyannya vykonannyu hel'sins'kykh uhod) to monitor human rights in Ukraine. The group was active until 1981 when all members were jailed.
The group's goal was to monitor the Soviet Government's compliance with the Helsinki Accords, which ensure human rights. The members of the group based the group's legal viability on the provision in the Helsinki Final Act, Principle VII, which established the rights of individuals to know and act upon their rights and duties.


== Details ==
Since 1977 the Ukrainian Helsinki Group foreign affiliate began its activities with the participation of Petro Hryhorenko, Nadiya Svitlychna, Leonid Plyushch and later  Nina Strokata-Karavanska Nadiya Svitlichna began to host the human rights themed radio programs on Svoboda radio.
From the very early days the group endured the repressions of Soviet authorities. In February 1977 the authorities began to arrest members of the Ukrainian Helsinki Group, and within two years all the founding members were tried and sentenced to exile or imprisonment for 7 to 10 years.At the end of 1979, six members of the group were forced to emigrate, while other Ukrainian dissidents were not allowed to do so. Soviet authorities used punitive medicine: some Ukrainian Helsinki Group members (Oksana Meshko, Vasyl Stus, Petro Sichko and his son Vasyl) were threatened with committal. Hanna Mykhailenko, who was a sympathizer of the Group, was detained in a psychiatric hospital in 1980. Bad conditions in Soviet camps and prisons caused the deaths of UHG members Oleksiy Tykhy and Vasyl Stus later on.
In 1982 the Initiative Group for the Defense of Believers and the Church was established, which considered itself a part of the Helsinki movement in Ukraine. Its organizers, Yosyp Terelia and Vasyl Kobryn, were both sentenced in 1985.
Some political prisoners from outside of Ukraine (an Estonian Mart Niklus and a Lithuanian Viktoras Petkus) announced their symbolical membership in the Group in 1983.
By 1983 the Ukrainian Helsinki Group had 37 members, of whom 22 were in prison camps, 5 were in exile, 6 emigrated to the West, 3 were released and were living in Ukraine, 1 (Mykhailo Melnyk) committed suicide.On July 7, 1988 members of group established and officially registered the Ukrainian Helsinki Association which in 1990 transformed itself into the Ukrainian Republican Party. In 2004, the Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union was established as association of public human rights organizations.


== Members ==
By the estimations of Vasyl Ovsyenko, the Group involved 41 persons in total. About 27 of them were sentenced by Soviet authorities to prisons and camps directly for their membership in the association. They spent altogether about 170 years in prisons, mental hospitals and in exile.


=== UHG abroad ===
Pyotr Grigorenko
Leonid Plyushch
Nina StrokataIn 1980 for UHG abroad Nadiya Svitlychna became an editor of the "Herald of Repressions in Ukraine" publication.


=== Arrested members ===
By 1982, most members of the Ukrainian Helsinki Group had been arrested:


=== In Mordovia prisons ===
Levko Lukyanenko
Mykola Rudenko
Oleksiy Tykhyi
Svyatoslav Karavansky
Volodymyr Romanyuk
Iryna Senyk
Danylo Shumuk
Yuriy Shukhevych
Oksana Popovych


== See also ==
Moscow Helsinki Group
Ukrainian Christian Democratic Party
Human rights movement in the Soviet Union
List of members, known members


== References ==


== External links ==
Ukrainian Helsinki Human rights Union
Ukrainian Helsinki Group - Documents, Members, Chronology (in Ukrainian)
Haynes, Victor (Winter 1983). "The Ukrainian Helsinki Group: a postmortem". Journal of Ukrainian Studies. 8 (2): 103–113.
Zinkevych, Osyp (1993). "Ukrainian Helsinki Group".  In Kubiĭovych, Volodymyr; Struk, Danylo (eds.). Encyclopedia of Ukraine. Vol. 5. University of Toronto Press. pp. 387–388. ISBN 0802030106.
The persecution of the Ukrainian Helsinki Group (PDF). Toronto, Canada: Human Rights Commission, World Congress of Free Ukrainians. 1980. ASIN B0000EED4K. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 March 2016.
The persecution of the Ukrainian Helsinki Group. Toronto, Canada: Human Rights Commission, World Congress of Free Ukrainians. 1985.
The human rights movement in Ukraine: documents of the Ukrainian Helsinki Group, 1976–1980. Smoloskyp Publishers. 1980. ISBN 0914834444.