Udaya Kumar (academic)

Udaya Kumar Dharmalingam born 10 October 1978 in Kallakurichi, Tamil Nadu is the designer of the Indian rupee sign. His design was selected from among five short listed symbols. According to Udaya Kumar the design is based on the Indian tricolour.He is the Head Of Department of Design at IIT Guwahati.


== Personal life ==
Udaya Kumar is son of N. Dharmalingam, a former DMK MLA Tamil Nadu.


== Academics ==
Udaya Kumar attended La Chatelaine junior college in Chennai. He obtained a bachelor's degree in architecture (B.Arch) from the School of Architecture and Planning (SAP) at Anna University, Chennai in 2001. Subsequently he received his master's degree, an MDes in Visual Communication, from the Industrial Design Centre (IDC) of IIT Bombay in 2003. He also did his doctoral studies at the IDC, receiving his PhD in 2010.


== Research ==

His areas of interest include graphic design, typography, type design and design research with special focus on Tamil typography (the subject of his doctoral research).
He has also designed a Tamil font named "Parashakti" as a mini project at the IDC, under the guidance of Prof. G. V. Sreekumar, who is one of the few font experts in the country. During his MDes project he wrote and designed a book on Tamil typography, which is the first attempt at bringing such a subject to a Tamil audience. In this book Udaya Kumar also created new Tamil terminology for many typographic terms where English words were used.Kumar also provided guidance for the designing of the official mascot for the 49th Inter IIT Sports Meet.
Minister of Information and Broadcasting
Kumar conceptualized the design for Rupee symbol for Indian currency. The symbol is designed using the Devanagari letter र ‘Ra’ and Roman capital letter ‘R’. The letters are derived from the word Rupiah in Hindi and Rupees in English, so the symbol is meaningful to both Indians and international users. The symbol also uses the Shiro Rekha, the horizontal top line which is unique to Indian Devanagari script. The two horizontal lines form an "equals" sign, which also evokes the tri-color Indian flag. Ambika Soni approved the new rupee symbol on July 15, 2010. Udaya Kumar was awarded prize money of ₹ 250,000 for his efforts.


== References ==


== External links ==
Udaya Kumar's design proposal for the Indian rupee sign
Official announcement of the sign
WebRupee, guidance for use of the sign on the web
WebRupee ₹ Drupal Project