The Ol' Razzle Dazzle

The Ol' Razzle Dazzle is the third studio album by Australian singer-songwriter Missy Higgins, and was released by Eleven on 1 June 2012. Higgins began work on the album after a quiet retreat from the industry to refocus her life on other pursuits, including attending University and living in a share house. After playing Lilith Fair in the summer of 2010, Higgins decided to come back to music and worked with fellow singer/songwriter Butterfly Boucher, who helped co-produce The Ol' Razzle Dazzle with Nashville producer/engineer Brad Jones. The album was made available for pre-order on April 26, 2012.The first single from the album, "Unashamed Desire", was released on April 23, 2012 with an accompanying video.


== Reception ==
Cameron Adams from Herald Sun said "Songs written about writing songs aren't uncommon... Missy Higgins has now added to that lesser-known genre: songs written about being unable to write songs." adding "Higgins hasn't lost her way with words."Sean Holio from Cooltry said "The eclectic and diverse album keeps the listener constantly tuned in from the opening notes of "Set Me On Fire" to the closing and calming "Sweet Arms of a Tune". Both, coincidentally, are the closest to sounding like Missy Higgins. Everything in between takes the listener on an eclectic journey that not only showcases Missy's ability to create and piece together a striking pop song but also displays her growth as an artist and a musician."Tyler McLoughlan from The Music AU said "Missy Higgins' much-lauded comeback record is as transparent as her recent media interviews explaining how a troubled relationship with music and fame led to her five-year absence."Emmica Schlobohm from the AU Review said "This album is about a life of music and the relationship that Higgins has with her art form." adding "it was refreshing to listen to the complex, mature songs featured on The Ol' Razzle Dazzle. Some people will probably be surprised and unsure about whether the new Higgins hits the spot but I'm a firm believer in an artists' right to grow and change."Alice Juster from Music Feeds said "The Ol' Razzle Dazzle is experimental, and far from the stripped-back acoustics we are used to from Higgins. The album brings a divine mixture of country, pop and soulful blues. The unmistakeable heart-aching personal touch that Higgins adds to every one of her songs is still ever so strong." adding "The album incorporates heavy-hearted soul with Missy’s unforgettable voice, and what it presents is dazzling."Emily Young LOTL from called the album a "breath of fresh air that fans had been clamoring for after her brief departure from the music scene." 


== Track listing ==


== Charts ==
The album debuted at number 1 on the ARIA Albums Chart the week of 12 June 2012. It is now Higgins' third straight number-one album. Higgins has the second-most number-one albums by an Australian female artist. Only Delta Goodrem, Kasey Chambers, Olivia Newton-John and Kylie Minogue have done better, with four number-one ARIA albums.


== Certifications ==


== References ==