Big Time Wrestling (Detroit)

Big Time Wrestling (also known as NWA Detroit) was a professional wrestling promotion headquartered in Detroit, Michigan in the United States.


== History ==
Professional wrestling debuted in Detroit in the 1920s when Nick Londos began promoting events in the Detroit Olympia. London was succeeded by Adam Weissmueller, then by Louis Markowitz. By the 1930s, multiple promoters were competing in the territory.In the aftermath of World War II, Weissmueller's former assistant Harry Light established the Harry Light Wrestling Office as a vehicle for promoting professional wrestling in Detroit and secured the rights to promote events at the Arena Gardens. In 1948, Light founded the National Wrestling Alliance along with Al Haft, Paul George, Orville Brown, Sam Muchnick, and Tony Stretcher. The six promoters agreed to divide the United States into regional territories within which they would not compete with one another and to recognise a single World Heavyweight Champion who would travel the country wrestling in each territory. By the 1950s, Light - along with his business partners Jack Britton and Bert Ruby - controlled professional wrestling in Detroit and Big Time Wrestling on WXYZ-TV Channel 7 was one of the most popular programs airing in Detroit.In 1959, Jim Barnett and Johnny Doyle (supported by backers such as Frank Tunney) formed a holding company, the Barnett-Doyle Corporation, and began promoting in Detroit, buying-out Light. Barnett and Doyle were originally "outlaw" promoters but the territory later rejoined the National Wrestling Alliance.In 1964, professional wrestler Ed "The Sheik" Farhat and his father-in-law Francis Fleser acquired the promotion (along with the rights to promote wrestling in the Cobo Arena) from Barnett and Doyle for $50,000, forming "World Wide Sports" as a holding company. Farhat booked himself as the promotion's top wrestler, winning the NWA United States Heavyweight Championship (Detroit version) 12 times. By the 1960s, the promotion was airing two to three television programs per week and staging weekly house shows at the Cobo Arena.In the early-1970s, the promotion faced competition from Dick the Bruiser and Wilbur Snyder's newly established All Star Championship Wrestling promotion, which utilized talent from the Indianapolis, Indiana-based World Wrestling Association. After several wrestlers defected to ASCW, Big Time Wrestling responded by bringing in talent from other NWA territories. ASCW stopped promoting in 1974 and Dick the Bruiser joined Big Time Wrestling, facing The Sheik in a series of brawls. During the 1970s, Big Time Wrestling helped popularize hardcore wrestling.The promotion's fortunes began to decline in the mid-1970s due to a combination of the 1973–75 recession, "no-shows" by wrestlers, and audiences becoming tired of the formulaic booking. As audiences dwindled, events were relocated to the Michigan State Fairgrounds Coliseum, and then again to the Lincoln Park Community Center outside of Detroit. The promotion was wound-up in 1980.
Big Time Wrestling was the subject of the mockumentary  I Like to Hurt People. Professional wrestling in Detroit remained subdued until the World Wrestling Federation began promoting in the city as part of the 1980s professional wrestling boom.


== Championships ==


== Alumni ==
Abdullah the Butcher
Bobo Brazil
Killer Tim Brooks
Haystacks Calhoun
George Cannon
Ripper Collins
Al Costello
Bull Curry
Flying Fred Curry
Dick the Bruiser
Irish Mickey Doyle
Dominic DeNucci
Pampero Firpo
Dory Funk Jr.
Terry Funk
Gino Hernandez
Professor Hiro
Ben Justice
Killer Kowalski
Ernie Ladd
Lord Athol Layton (announcer)
Mark Lewin
Tony Marino
Luiz Martinez
Tex McKenzie
Sam Menacker (announcer)
Mighty Igor
Dusty Rhodes
Ernie Roth (announcer)
The Sheik
Ray St. Clair
Hans Schmidt (wrestler)
George Steele
The Stomper
Johnny Valentine
Fritz Von Erich
Kojika
Baron Fritz von Rashke
Rocky Johnson (frequent tag team partner of Ben Justice)
The California Hell's Angels
Thunderbolt Patterson
"Iron Mike" Loren
Guy Mitchell "The (other) Stomper"


== Footnotes ==


== External links ==
Big Time Wrestling at WrestlingTitles.com
I Like to Hurt People on IMDb