Big Time Wrestling Star Wars (1981)

NWA Big Time Wrestling (BTW; Later known as World Class Championship Wrestling), based out of Dallas, Texas held a their first major professional wrestling super shows under the name 'Wrestling Star Wars in 1981, an event series that would run until 1989, with at least three of these being held in 1981. Promoter Fritz Von Erich held two "Wrestling Star Wars" events, one in June and one in October as well as a special "Christmas Star Wars" on December 25 of that year.


== Wrestling Star Wars (June) ==
It is believed that the June 4, 1981 version of Wrestling Star Wars was the first major professional wrestling show held by NWA Big Time Wrestling. Due to sparse records from 1981 the full show has not been found documented, only three matches on the show have been verified. Kerry Von Erich defeated Ernie Ladd to win the NWA American Heavyweight Championship on the show.
As of May 2019, all known matches are available as Hidden Gems on the WWE Network.


== Wrestling Star Wars (October) ==
Records are not clear if the October 25, 1981 Wrestling Star Wars was the second or third show that Dallas, Texas based NWA Big Time Wrestling held under that name. Wrestling Star Wars was a series of major professional wrestling events, most held at the Reunion Arena in Dallas. Big Time Wrestling promoter Fritz Von Erich's son Kevin Von Erich was supposed to team up with Kerry Von Erich on the show, but had to be replaced at the last moment by Terry Orndorff. Kerry Von Erich and Orndorff would go on to defeat the team of the Great Kabuki and Chan Chung to win the NWA American Tag Team Championship.


== Christmas Star Wars ==
NWA Big Time Wrestling's Christmas Star Wars was a major professional wrestling event held on December 25, 1981 at the Reunion Arena in Dallas, Texas. The show was the first show to be billed as "Christmas Star Wars", starting an annual tradition that would last until 1987. For the show promoter Fritz Von Erich had brought in El Solitario from the Universal Wrestling Association (UWA) in Mexico to defend the UWA World Junior Light Heavyweight Championship as part of the show. Fritz himself wrestled one of his last high-profile matches of his career as he took on and lost to the Great Kabuki in a "Texas death" match where there were no disqualifications. The main event was a 14-man battle royal featuring wrestlers that had already competed once that night.


== References ==