Sugar Tax (album)

Sugar Tax is the eighth album by Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark (OMD), released in 1991 on Virgin Records. It was the group's first studio album since 1986, and the first of three recorded without co-founder Paul Humphreys, who had departed in 1989. Featuring singer Andy McCluskey with a new backing band, it leans more towards the dance-pop genre that was prevalent in the early 1990s, than the experimental brand of synthpop which characterised OMD's earlier recordings.
The album charted at No. 3 in the UK Albums Chart and spawned two UK Top 10 hit singles: "Sailing on the Seven Seas" and "Pandora's Box". It had sold over three million copies by 2007.Sugar Tax is the only album in the OMD catalogue not to feature the songwriting contribution of Paul Humphreys.


== Reception ==
Richard Riccio described the record as being "sprinkled with gems" in his review for the St. Petersburg Times. He added: "Sugar Tax is classic OMD, and after a four-year absence marks a triumphant return for one of new wave's original invaders." Gina Arnold in Entertainment Weekly wrote: "OMD have never been afraid of combining naked emotion with their cold techno-mechanics, and it's this emotion — exhibited in lead singer Andy McClusky's [sic] sobbing, soaring vocals – that redeems their take on the otherwise fairly vacant dance-pop genre." A review in Q magazine called Sugar Tax "an unflappable album of quality songs which re-establishes OMD's credentials as masters of synthesized melancholia and dreamy pop songs."Retrospectively, Ned Raggett in AllMusic described the album as "pleasant instead of memorable" and felt that it suffered due to the absence of McCluskey's former bandmates; Raggett did, however, have praise for "Sailing on the Seven Seas". Trouser Press found the record to be "simply ordinary and mediocre, a disappointment from a once-captivating band".


== Track listing ==
The album does not include the title track "Sugar Tax", as it was not ready in time for release. It was instead included as the B-side to the single "Then You Turn Away".

All tracks are written by OMD (i.e. Andy McCluskey), except where noted.


== Album singles ==


== Personnel ==
OMD:

Andy McCluskey - lead vocals, bass guitar
Nigel Ipinson - keyboards
Phil Coxon - keyboards, engineering, demos
Recorded and Performed by: Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark, except "Neon Lights" by OMD, Christine Mellor
Produced by: Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark, except Howard Gray (4), Andy Richards (7,9,12)
Mixed by: Jeremy Allom, Avril Mackintosh, Alan Meyerson, Steve Williams
Engineered by: Jeremy Allom, Phil Coxon, Fred De Faye, Guy Forrester, Mike Haas, Renny Hill, Pat O'Shaughnessy, Steve Williams
Guitar by: Stuart Boyle
Additional Vocals by: Carmen Daye, Doreen Edwards, Sue Forshaw, Ann Heston, Stuart Kershaw, Nathalie Loates, Christine Mellor, Beverly Reppion
Management: Steve Jensen, Martin Kirkup
Sleeve designed by: Area
Photographed by: Taylor Key
Many thanks to: Stuart, Lloyd, Hambi and all the Pink Posse


== Equipment ==
Recording:
Akai S1000 sampler + hard drive
Alesis HR16 drum machine
Atari 1040ST computer
Casio CZ 230s synth
E-mu Proteus sample reader
Korg M1 workstation
Oberheim Matrix 1000 synth module
Roland D110 synth module
Roland Super JX synth module
Steinberg Pro24 v3 sequencing software
Yamaha RX-5 drum machine
Yamaha TX81Z synth moduleLive:

Akai S1000 (8MEG) sampler (x2)
Cheetah Midi controller keyboard
Korg M1R synth module (x2)
Roland A80 MIDI controller keyboard
Roland D-550
Roland piano module


== References ==