Red onion

Red onions are cultivars of the onion (Allium cepa) with purplish-red skin and white flesh tinged with red.
These onions tend to be medium to large in size and have a mild to sweet flavor. They are often consumed raw, grilled or lightly cooked with other foods, or added as a decoration to salads. They tend to lose their colour when cooked.
Red onions are available throughout the year. Red onions are high in flavonoids, and fibre (compared to white and yellow onions).They can be stored 3 to 4 months at room temperature.Known varieties include 'Red Zeppelin'.The skin of the red onion has been used as a dye.


== Red onion of Turda ==
The red onion from Turda (Cluj County, Central Romania) (Romanian: "Ceapa de Turda",) is a local variety of red onion with light sweeter taste and particular aroma. The area of cultivation encompass the lower Arieş valley and the middle Mureş valley.
Turda onion bulbs are traditionally intertwined into long strings (1–2 m) for marketing purposes and can be found at the traditional markets all over central Romania. "Turda Red Onion" is usually served fresh, as a salad or part of mixed salads and especially as a compulsory garnish for the traditional bean-and-smoked ham soups.


== Red onion of Tropea ==

The red onion from Tropea, Italy, (Italian: "Cipolla Rossa di Tropea") is a particular variety of red onion which grows in a small area of Calabria in southern Italy named Capo Vaticano near the city of Tropea. This onion has a stronger and sweeter aroma and the inner part is juicier and whiter than other red onions and it is possible to make a jam with it. In March 2008, the European Union registered the Protected Designation of Origin mark for the red onions produced in this particular area.


== Wethersfield red onion ==
In the United States, one of the most prominent cultivars of red onion was grown in Wethersfield, Connecticut, and was a major source of onions for New England until the late 1800s.


== References ==


== External links ==
Onion Cultivation at the World Vegetable Center
The red onion of Tropea (Italian)
Vacanze in Calabria: The red onion of Tropea