Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah! (musical)

"Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh (A Letter from Camp)" is a novelty song by Allan Sherman and Lou Busch, based on letters of complaint Allan received from his son Robert while Robert attended Camp Champlain, a summer camp in Westport, New York.


== The song ==
The song is a parody that complains about the fictional "Camp Granada" and is set to the tune of Amilcare Ponchielli's Dance of the Hours. The name derives from the first lines:

Hello Muddah, hello Fadduh. Here I am at Camp Granada. Camp is very entertaining. And they say we'll have some fun if it stops raining.The lyrics go on to describe unpleasant, dangerous, and tragic developments, such as fellow campers going missing or contracting deadly illnesses. He asks how his "precious little brother" is doing, and begs to be taken home, afraid of being left out in the forest and fearing getting eaten by a bear, promising to behave, and even letting his aunt Bertha hug and kiss him. At the end, he notes that the rain has stopped and fun activities have begun (such as swimming, sailing, and baseball), and asks his parents to "kindly disregard this letter".


== Success ==
The song scored #2 on the Billboard Hot 100 list for three weeks beginning on August 24, 1963.  It was kept from #1 by both: Fingertips by "Little" Stevie Wonder and My Boyfriend's Back by The Angels.  Sherman wrote a new 'back at Camp Granada' version, "Hello Mudduh, Hello Fadduh!", for a May 27, 1964, performance on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson. Sherman wrote a third version for, and acted in, a 1965 TV commercial for a board game about Camp Granada, a "real rotten camp".  The original version also reached #9 on the Pop-Standard Singles chart.The song won the 1964 Grammy Award for Best Comedy Performance. The song was played often on the Dr. Demento Show and is featured on the Rhino Records compilation album, Dr. Demento 20th Anniversary Collection.
The song was also featured in the end credits of the 1993 film Indian Summer.
The song was featured in the final scene of The King of Queens episode "Tube Stakes", during which main character Arthur Spooner performs his morning stretches.


== Translations ==
Variations of the song include adaptations in Swedish ("Brev från kolonien" by Cornelis Vreeswijk), Finnish ("Terve mutsi, terve fatsi, tässä teidän ihmelapsi") and Norwegian ("Brev fra leier'n" by Birgit Strøm). The Finnish version is included in the Finnish Boy Scouts' songbook. The Swedish version notably does not revolve around the camper hating the camp, but is about the kids running roughshod over it and having run off all the counselors, one of whom has committed suicide after they let a snake into the mess hall, and the organizer of the camp being arrested by police after the kids start a forest fire. The song begins with the boy writing the letter asking his parents to send more money, because he has lost all his pocket money playing dice with the other campers. The song then ends with the boy having to wrap up the letter as he is about to join the others in burning down the neighboring camp lodge.
The Dutch version Brief uit la Courtine sung bij Rijk de Gooyer is not about a children's summer camp, but about a soldier in the Dutch army camp at La Courtine, France.
The Austrian comedian Paul Pizzera presented a German interpretation with the name “Jungscharlager” in 2013.


== See also ==
Camp Runamuck, a sitcom (1965–66) loosely inspired by the song
Camp Granada, a 1965 board game inspired by the song
Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah! (book), a 2004 children's book based on the song
Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh! (musical), a musical revue inspired by the song
Sandra Gould, who released a response novelty recording, set to the same music, entitled "Hello Melvin (This Is Mama)".


== References and notes ==


== External links ==
"Hello Muddah, Hello Fadduh (A Letter from Camp)" at MusicBrainz (information and list of recordings)