Purcell Marian High School

Purcell Marian High School is a parochial high school in the East Walnut Hills neighborhood of Cincinnati, Ohio, United States, based in the Marianist Tradition.  It is located in the DeSales Corner business district, along Madison Road.
Purcell Marian is a Roman Catholic, co-educational high school serving a multi-racial student body of many faiths with differing backgrounds and educational needs.   It is chartered by the state of Ohio and accredited by North Central Association of Schools.   Urban in its environment, it is supervised by the Archdiocese of Cincinnati and administered and staffed by lay and religious, primarily the Society of Mary and the Sisters of Charity. As of 2017, enrollment is 326 students.  For sports the Cavaliers compete in the Greater Catholic League.


== Purcell High School ==
Purcell High School began in 1928 as an Archdiocesan High School for young men. The site was originally purchased in 1924 by the Rt. Reverend Msgr. J. Henry Schengber for the parish of St. Francis de Sales. Under the direction of the Most Reverend Henry Moeller (Archbishop of Cincinnati) plans were drawn up for a high school which was to occupy the site of the present day Walnut Hills High School.   In 1928, the Most Reverend John T. McNicholas decided to locate the school on Hackberry Street and gave it the name Purcell, in honor of the first Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Cincinnati, John Baptist Purcell.   Purcell High School was under the administration of the Brothers of Mary and was staffed by Brothers, Marianist Priests, and lay men and women.  The Eveslage Athletic Center was dedicated in 1971.


== Marian High School ==
Marian High School began in 1908 as a co-educational parish school – the first school of its type in Cincinnati.   It was named St. Marys and was located at St. Mary Parish in Hyde Park.   For years the high school shared facilities with the elementary school in the building that had been erected in 1903 as St. Mary Mission Chapel.   A new St. Mary High School was constructed in 1923.   In 1928, St. Mary became a diocesan regional high school for girls only.   The boys who had been enrolled there were transferred to the new Purcell High School.   In 1963, a new high school called Marian High School was under the administration of the Sisters of Charity and was staffed by Sisters, Archdiocesan Priests, and lay men and women. (This building now houses The Springer School, on Madison Road in O'Bryonville.)


== Merger to Form Purcell Marian ==
In 1980 the decision was made to merge both schools and the name changed to Purcell Marian High School. Purcell High School and Marian High School merged beginning with the 1981-82 school year. The name of the new school would be Purcell Marian High School. It would be located at the Purcell site and begin with the 1981-82 school year.   The mascot would be the Cavalier, and the school's colors would be Crimson, Blue and Gold.
The school seal shows the picture of the Blessed Virgin and Child. The inscription includes the school's motto, Praestans Inter Omnes, and the date of foundation.


== Academics ==
The curriculum is accredited by the Ohio Department of Education and the Ohio Catholic School Accrediting Association. Purcell Marian has recently adopted a new method of "blended" learning using a combination of online and class taught curriculum for the 2013-14 school year. The program so far includes mathematics and is expected to expand to other subjects in the near future.


== Athletics ==


=== Ohio High School Athletic Association State Championships ===

Boys Football – 1986 
Boys Baseball – 1953, 2003 
Boys Basketball - 1985 


== Clubs and activities ==
The school's Latin Club functions as a local chapter of both the Ohio Junior Classical League (OJCL) and National Junior Classical League (NJCL).Black Student Union represents diversity among the students.In April 2008, the Ultimate Frisbee team won the B-Division City Tournament.


== Notable alumni, teachers, and coaches ==
Jim Bolger, former Major League Baseball player
Drew Denson, first baseman, first-round pick of 1984 Major League Baseball draft
Derrek Dickey, class of 1969, professional basketball player for 1975 NBA champion Golden State Warriors 
Khalil El-Amin, offensive lineman at Cincinnati, four-time letter winner, won 2010 CIFL Championship with the Cincinnati Commandos
Richard T. Farmer, self-made billionaire and founder of Cintas Corporation
Maxwell Holt, 2005, member of United States men's national volleyball team and Italian club Modena Volley
Kevin Harrington, investor ("shark") on the ABC show Shark Tank
Jack Hoffman, NFL player
Terry Killens, NFL linebacker
Austin King, NFL lineman
Charlie Luken, politician, former Mayor of Cincinnati
Tom Luken, politician, former Mayor of Cincinnati
Steven Matre, 2006, baseball player, selected in 2010 MLB Draft by Los Angeles Dodgers out of College of Mount St. Joseph
Bobby Moore, professional baseball player
Scott Munninghoff, professional baseball player, first-round pick in 1977 Major League Baseball draft
Michelle Mussman, politician, Illinois State Representative
Tyrone Power, class of 1931, actor, Hollywood film star of 1940s and '50s
Roger Staubach, class of 1960, NFL quarterback for Dallas Cowboys in Pro Football Hall of Fame
Mike Wright, class of 2000, former NFL lineman for New England Patriots
Robert Kistner, class of 1934, co-creator of birth control pill
Bob Wellman, former professional baseball player


== External links ==
http://www.purcellmarian.org/


== Notes and references ==