Game Wave Family Entertainment System

The Game Wave Family Entertainment System, commonly abbreviated as Game Wave, is a hybrid DVD player and home video game console manufactured by ZAPiT Games. It was first released in Canada in October 2005. It is part of the seventh generation of video game consoles. It was released in the United States at an MSRP of $99. The Game Wave saved manufacturing costs by adding an Altera MAX II Complex Programmable Logic Device to an inexpensive DVD player. It was packaged with the pack-in game 4 Degrees: The Arc of Trivia, Vol. 1 (later changed to Veggie Tales: Veg-Out! Family Tournament).


== Hardware ==
The Game Wave was packaged with both RCA and S-Video cables, along with 4 IR-based wireless controllers (modeled after typical DVD remote controllers) and a case that holds up to 6 controllers. The case and console are designed to sit side-by-side on a shelf to form a complete wave shape.


=== Controllers ===
The Game Wave controller has 4-directional navigational buttons used for menu navigation and DVD playback control. The controller has 4 alphabetical buttons along the top labeled "A", "B", "C", and "D" designed primarily for selecting responses in trivia games. A numeric keypad lines the bottom of the controller with Menu and Setup buttons.The Game Wave controllers came in 6 colors: blue, yellow, green, red, purple, and orange. Blue, yellow, green, and red come packaged with the console, whereas the purple and orange controllers could be purchased separately for an MSRP of $30. Each controller color has a different IR beat frequency, allowing the console to differentiate the different controllers for multiplayer gameplay for up to 6 players (if the game in question supports it).


== Software library ==
Due to the shape of the controller and marketing concerns for a "Family Entertainment System," no heavily action-based game genres are present within the Game Wave's 13 game library. Rather, the software library consists mainly of trivia and puzzle games. In addition, many Game Wave games are heavily inspired by other video games and TV shows.


== References ==

Game Wave DVD system lets families play together
Game Wave: New Approach to DVD Games
Game Wave - Video Game Review


== External links ==
Official website
Technical History of the Game Wave
Feature titled "SYSTEMS THAT COULDN'T EVEN RELEASE 15 GAMES BEFORE THEY BIT THE DUST" by KELLEN PERRY at SVG.com