Central University of Nicaragua

The Central University of Nicaragua (Spanish: Universidad Central de Nicaragua - UCN) was founded in 1998. It is nationally accredited and recognized by the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Nicaragua via the Council of National Universities (Consejo Nacional de Universidades) in official government session No. 10-1998, and approved by the Assembly of the Republic Decree No. 2822 according to the Constitution of the Republic and the Law on the Autonomy of Institutions of Higher Education.
The Central University of Nicaragua (UCN) is an accredited university by Accreditation Service for International Colleges and Universities (ASIC) in the UK. The university is listed with the International Association of Universities,  an organization of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). International Association of Universities also listed UCN in the international handbook of accredited universities published by the United Nations.


== Division of International Programs ==
The recent history of the UCN is characterized by collaborations with universities in different parts of the world. On 22 March 2012 the UCN signed in Managua the agreement: "International Confederation of Higher Education"  with the following universities: United Mahatma Gandhi University in India, Universidad de Cundinamarca in Colombia, Universidad de la Salle in Costa Rica, 3G University in the UAE, Fundación Universitaria Samuel Hahnemann in Colombia and Universidad Azteca in Mexico, particularly in the context of the double doctorate EdD-PhD offered in the Department of European programs in Innsbruck, Austria. It also collaborates with Texila American University, Guyana, to provide distance learning programs to students from over 45 countries. In Nicaragua, it has 3 locations and has 6,473 on-campus students as well as 4,251 distance learning students as at 2014/2015.


== Faculties and Programs ==
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences (Programs: Medicine and Surgery, Pharmacy, Psychology, Health Sciences, Environmental Sciences)
Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences (Programs: Accountancy and Auditing, Economics, Management, Marketing, Banking, Tourism and Hotel Management)
Faculty of Law and Social Science (Programs: Law, International Relations and foreign trade, International Commerce)
Faculty of Engineering (Program: Systems Engineering)
Veterinary Medicine (Program: Veterinary Medicine)
Psychology (Program: Clinical Psychology, Coaching Psychology, Business Psychology, Neuro-Linguistic Psychology, Health and Psychotherapy)The University runs Master of Art (MA)program in International Relations; Master of Business Administration (MBA – Executive and Regular), Master of Science (MSc) programs in Alternative Medicine, Human Resources, Finance, Marketing, Banking, Economics, Environmental Sciences and Inter-university Doctorate degree (PhD/DBA and PhD/EdD) programs. It also offers Postgraduate Degree Programs in Educational Psychology, Educational Technology, Rehabilitation and Therapy, Public Law as well as Postgraduate Diploma in Finance, Criminal Law and Commercial Law.


== References ==


== External links ==
Universidad Central de Nicaragua
Universidad Central de Nicaragua international programs
School of Environmental and Waste Management
UCN European Programmes
Doctor of Medicine (MD)Program offered by UCN in partnership with the Texila American University