Ubiquity Records

Ubiquity Records is an independent American Record Label that focuses on multiple genres, including but not limited to hip hop, electronic,  funk, Latin, soul, jazz, singer/songwriters and other musical genres.


== History ==
Ubiquity Records was conceived by Michael McFadin in the late 80’s after reading an article about how Delicious Vinyl was inspired by an article on Def Jam Records. He founded the label in 1990 along with his wife at the time out of the back of his record shop Groove Merchant Records in the Lower Haight of San Francisco. 
In 1989, Groove Merchant was a first of its kind (in the U.S.) boutique record shop in the Lower Haight area of San Francisco that specialized in vintage jazz, funk and soul genres.  The shop soon got a reputation as ‘the place’ for collectors and musicians to visit when in town. Some frequent customers included  Q-Tip from A Tribe Called Quest, Jamiroquai, Red Hot Chili Peppers, DJ Shadow, DJ Lethal, Neneh Cherry and her father Don Cherry, Tracy Chapman, Victor Willis of the Village People, Craig Kallman, Biz Markie, Marques Wyatt, Dante Ross, Dee-Lite and most notably the Beastie Boys who gave Michael a shout out in their song ‘Professor Booty’ “This one goes out to my man, the Groove Merchant, Coming through with beats for which I've been searching, Like two sealed copies, of Expansions, I'm like Tom Vu with yachts and mansions”.
Ubiquity Recordings is located in Costa Mesa, California, with an office in DTLA, California. Ubiquity has two imprint labels, Luv N' Haight (specializing in reissues) and Cubop Records (specializing in Latin jazz and salsa). Including all three imprints, the label has released over 8000 songs spanning all genres of music.


== Artists ==


== References ==


== External links ==
California-based Ubiquity Records wins Label of the Year
December Marks Ubiquity Records' Fifteenth Anniversary
Best of OC: The Arts and Other Highfalutin' Stuff
Dedicated to the Groove: Ubiquity Records celebrates 10 years of bringing out the music
Official Site