Helme

Mart Helme (born 31 October 1949) is an Estonian politician, Minister of the Interior since 29 April 2019, and chairman of the national conservative Conservative People's Party of Estonia (EKRE) since 13 April 2013. A historian by profession, he also served as Estonia's ambassador to Russia from 1995 to 1999. His son Martin Helme is the leader of the party's parliamentary group. Some media outlets have described him as politically populist and/or far-right.


== Early life ==
Mart Helme was born on 31 October 1949 in Pärnu. His father was a veteran of the Estonian Legion. He later said that listening to his father's stories about fighting on the Eastern Front made him an Estonian patriot despite being raised in the Soviet Union.After graduating from high school in Pärnu in 1968, he studied history at the University of Tartu and graduated in 1973.
In his youth, Helme played in several bands.


== Personal and pre-political life ==
He owns the Suure-Lähtru manor. He has worked as a journalist, publisher and diplomat. He has also been a farmer and a singer.


== Political career ==
Helme joined the Estonian diplomatic service in 1994. In 1995, he was appointed as the Estonian ambassador to Russia by President Lennart Meri. His tenure lasted until 1999. While in Moscow, he took part in the border negotiations with Russia.
From 2003 to 2005, Helme was a member of the agrarian-centrist People's Union of Estonia. In 2012, when the party merged with the Estonian Patriotic Movement, Helme became a member of the new Conservative People's Party of Estonia. A year later, he was elected its leader.
He has said that "Estonian politicians should honestly admit that our choice is between staying with those who are creating a United States of Europe and joining those who desire a Europe of nation states. The Conservative People's Party doesn't see a place for Estonia in a United States of Europe."In 2015 parliamentary election, Helme was elected to parliament with 6,714 individual votes and in the 2019 parliamentary election he increased his support to 9,170 individual votes.
In March 2019 Mart Helme said to the press that he wishes that one day his party would be the sole ruling party of Estonia.After EKRE's receiving of 17.8% of the votes in the 2019 parliamentary election and the subsequent inclusion in the governing coalition, Helme was appointed to Jüri Ratas' second cabinet as Estonia's interior minister. On May 2, 2019, Helme was also named First Deputy Prime Minister.


== Media controversy ==
Mart Helme has made headlines in the media with some of his opinions.

The number of negroes in Tallinn has grown explosively.

The police are already overwhelmed with work. Why should they be safeguarding the parades of perverts?


== Personal life ==
Helme's current wife, Helle-Moonika Helme, is an MP in the Riigikogu for EKRE. Mart Helme has a son, Martin Helme, also a prominent member of EKRE, from a previous marriage.


== References ==


== External links ==
Suure-Lähtru manor