Hikari Sentai Maskman

Hikari Sentai Maskman (光戦隊マスクマン, Hikari Sentai Masukuman) is Toei's eleventh entry of the Super Sentai metaseries. It aired on TV Asahi from February 28, 1987 to February 20, 1988, with a total of 51 episodes. Its international English title as listed by Toei is simply Maskman.It was the first Super Sentai series that showcased each members having their own individual vehicles that forms their robot, it also introduced non-Japanese martial arts discipline.


== Plot ==
Commander Sugata is a scientist and sage who excels in mental reinforcements and is a master of every martial arts discipline. He discovered the existence of the Underground Empire Tube, a once peaceful kingdom that has turned into a malignant force under the mysterious Zeba, who desires to conquer the surface. In order to stand against them and thwart their plans, Sugata recruits five young people to become the Maskmen. Each becomes specialized in a style of martial arts, and Sugata teaches them the ways of the mystical "Aura Power" energy. A year after Sugata recruits and trains the Maskmen, the Underground Empire Tube is ready to strike. Princess Ial of the deposed Igam Royal Family, sent to spy above ground as Mio, falls in love with Takeru, and wishes for those underground and above ground to coexist. She is kidnapped and imprisoned in ice for her betrayal. As Takeru and the Maskmen battle Tube, they learn about Ial and Igam's relationship, and a terrible dark secret about Zeba, the Tube leader.


== Characters ==


=== Maskmen ===

The Maskmen are the top secret fighting force formed by Sanjuro Sugata. Before Tube surfaced, the group posed as the pit crew of the Sugata Racing Team.

Takeru (タケル): The 23-year-old leader of the group who fights as Red Mask (レッドマスク, Reddo Masuku). He is a specialist in karate and a Formula One driver. He was spotted by Sugata a year prior to the beginning of the series while he saved the mother's infant from being crashed in the railway.  Sugata later offered him a spot on the Maskman team. His love for Mio and desire to find her are his motivations. While in Otaki, Takeru meets Norio through whom he masters the "God Hand" technique. Igam tries to eliminate him by travelling into the past. Near the end of the series, he single-handedly defeats Baraba out of rage in battle. He reunites with Mio in the end but he is forced to split up with her.
Weapons: Masky Blade (マスキーブレード, Masukī Burēdo).
Attacks: Laser Arrow (レーザーアロー, Rēzā Arō), Masky Crash (マスキークラッシュ, Masukī Kurasshu).
Meditation Gesture: Zai (Opened hands with index finger and thumb together), which signifies control over natural forces.
Kenta (ケンタ): The 21-year-old second-in-command of the team who fights as Black Mask (ブラックマスク, Burakku Masuku). He specializes in Kobudo. He is shy around women but can be a playboy at times. He is lighthearted, strong, and dependable. When a Dogler Beast stole the Aura Power of the other Maskmen, Kenta was the only one left who could fight. He worked as a mechanic for the Sugata Racing Team and once worked for the Sun Racing Team.
Weapons: Masky Rod (マスキーロッド, Masukī Roddo).
Meditation Gesture: Jin (all fingers enlaced in a fist), which signifies the guessing of others' thoughts and intentions.
Akira (アキラ): The youngest member of the group at 16 who fights as Blue Mask (ブル-マスク, Burū Masuku). He is a Chinese boxer and a straight sword expert. His father died while he was young and he was an only child. He moved to Tokyo in order to perfect his martial arts ability and to join the Maskmen. Akira unknowingly enters a Tube-rigged tournament. He wants to win to prove to his mother that he is successful in his chosen pursuit. Always cheerful, he loves apples and the idol Youko Minamino. Late in the series, he turns evil after being possessed by the spirit of a swordsman of the Royal Underground Empire named Imperial Underground Fencer Unas (地帝剣士ウナス, Chitei Kenshi Unasu). Unas was resurrected by some of the Royal Underground slaves of Tube in hopes that he would help set them free from Zeba's tyrannical rule. The underground slaves mistake Akira as a reincarnation of Unas. During the events of Kaizoku Sentai Gokaiger, Akira would appear to grant the Greater Power of the Maskmen to the Gokaigers. The Aura Power would later allow the Gokaigers to use the Aura in their attack Gokai Aura Galaxy.
Weapons: Masky Tonfas (マスキートンファー, Masukī Tonfā).
Meditation Gesture: Retsu (two fists together with index finger from left hand sticking out), which signifies dominion over time and space.
Haruka (ハルカ): A 19-year-old kunoichi who fights as Yellow Mask (イエローマスク, Ierō Masuku). She was raised in a family of ninja, brought up to carry the tradition at the cost of a happy childhood. Forced by her father to abandon all feminine things to focus on her ninja training, she appears tomboyish and is a fierce fighter. She is highly intelligent and loves dancing as she tutors a young girl who is unable to afford dance lessons.
Weapons: Masky Rotor (マスキーローター, Masukī Rōtā).
Attacks: Yellow Mask Shadow Clone (イエローマスク影分身, Ierō Masuku Kage Bunshin).
Meditation Gesture: Tou (All fingers together in a fist except ring and pinkie), which signifies harmony with the Universe.
Momoko (モモコ): A 19-year-old expert in T'ai chi ch'uan and is also strong and dedicated who fights as Pink Mask (ピンクマスク, Pinku Masuku). A young woman with a pure heart, she often teaches t'ai chi to young people.  She once, by chance, met Ial and Igam's mother, who gave her the saintly flower known as Carollove. Momoko treasures it because it saved her when she fell underground as a child. The first four letters of her name is the kanji for her color designation.
Weapons: Masky Ribbon (マスキーリボン, Masukī Ribon).
Meditation Gesture: Sha (All fingers together in a fist except index fingers), which signifies self-healing.


==== Arsenal ====
Masking Brace (マスキングブレス, Masukingu Buresu): The Maskman's transformation device. They transform by saying "Aura Mask!" (オーラマスク！, Ōra Masuku!).
Laser Magnum (レーザーマグナム, Rēzā Magunamu): The sidearms of the team that can be used as guns or transformed into swords.
Shot Bomber (ショットボンバー, Shotto Bonbā): The team's first finishing cannon, with Red Mask donning a backpack. Destroyed by Kiros and Beam Doggler in Episode 27.
Jet Cannon (ジェットカノン, Jetto Kanon): The team's second finishing cannon, built to replace the Shot Bomber. It can double as a flight rider for Red Mask.


==== Vehicles ====
Spin Cruiser (スピンクルーザー, Supin Kurūzā): A buggy based on  designs of the Sugata Super F1 racecar. It is driven by Red Mask and fires the Spin Magnum. Its maximum speed is 470km/h.
Mask Roaders (マスクローダー, Masuku Rōdā): Black through Pink's Suzuki RG250 motorcycles. Their maximum speed is 330km/h.
Turbo Ranger (ターボランジャー, Tābo Ranjā): A carrier mecha in the shape of a gigantic sportscar that carries the component mecha of Great Five and the Land Galaxy. It is not to be confused with Kousoku Sentai Turboranger due to its Japanese pronunciation.


==== Mecha ====
Great Five (グレートファイブ, Gurēto Faibu): A giant robot formed from five components when the command "Combine! Five Cross!" is given. Its primary weapon is the Photo Electron Riser (光電子ライザー, Kōdenshi Raizā) sword, and it destroys monsters with its finishing attack, the Final Aura Burst (ファイナルオーラバースト, Fainaru Ōra Bāsuto). Its other weapons are the Five Shield (ファイブシールド, Faibu Shīrudo), Gyro Cutter (ジャイロカッター, Jairo Kattā), and Great Gun (グレートガン, Gurēto Gan). When the Great Five was taken from the Maskmen, it was briefly controlled by Kimen Doggler until the Galaxy Robo forced the parasite off.
Masky Fighter (マスキーファイター, Masukī Faitā): It is piloted by Red Mask. It is stored in the cabin of the Turbo Ranger. It forms the head and chest of the Great Five. It appears again in Gaoranger vs Super Sentai.
Masky Drill (マスキードリル, Masukī Doriru): It is driven by Black Mask, stored in the trunk of the Turbo Ranger, and is able to fire the Drill Beam. It forms the main torso and upper legs of the Great Five and the Great Gun.
Masky Tank (マスキータンク, Masukī Tanku): It is driven by Blue Mask, stored in the hood of the Turbo Ranger behind the Masky Jet and the Masky Gyro. It is able to fire the Tank Cannon. It forms the lower legs of the Great Five.
Masky Jet (マスキージェット, Masukī Jetto): It is piloted by Yellow Mask. It is stored in the hood of the Turbo Ranger, to the left of the Masky Gyro. It forms the left arm of the Great Five and the Five Shield.
Masky Gyro (マスキージャイロ, Masukī Jairo): It is piloted by Pink Mask. It is stored in the hood of the Turbo Ranger, to the right of the Masky Jet and with rotors folded for ease of storage. It forms the right arm of the Great Five and the Gyro Cutter.
Land Galaxy (ランドギャラクシー, Rando Gyarakushī): A large tractor trailer for the Maskmen, piloted by the entire group. The Land Galaxy was built as part of a competition to determine the mecha to be used by the Maskmen but was considered too unstable to control when it seemingly killed its creator. It was only when the Great Five was captured by Tube that the Maskmen found the Land Galaxy and added it to their arsenal.
Galaxy Robo (ギャラクシーロボ, Gyarakushī Robo): Maskman's second robot formed from the Land Galaxy when the command "Galaxy Change!" is given. Its main weapons are the Galaxy Drill (ギャラクシードリル, Gyarakushī Doriru), Galaxy Anchor (ギャラクシーアンカー, Gyarakushī Ankā) and the Galaxy Bazooka (ギャラクシーバズーカ, Gyarakushī Bazūka). Its finishing attack is the Iron Fist Aura Galaxy (鉄拳オーラギャラクシー, Tekken Ōra Gyarakushī); it resumes its Land Galaxy mode to build speed and then resumes its robot mode and executes a karate chop. It can be transported by the Turbo Ranger in lieu of the Great Five components and it is stored in the hood.


==== Allies ====
Commander Sanjuro Sugata (姿 三十郎 長官, Sugata Sanjūrō-chōkan): Sugata is a scientist and martial artist who formed the Maskman team. He is a wise man who excels in mental reinforcements and every martial art. Sugata was the one learned of Tube's existence and their plot to conquer the surface world. A mysterious man, Sugata fights against Takeru the year before he was chosen to become Red Mask. He is the owner of Sugata Racing, a motoring team for which Takeru is a driver and Kenta once worked as an engineer.
Dr. Azuma (東 博士, Azuma-hakase): Sugata's assistant; she works in the computer room and monitors the performance of the Maskman team.
Dr. Catherine (ドクター・カトリーヌ, Dokutā Katorīnu, 3): A Caucasian woman who assists Commander Sugata alongside Dr. Azuma.
Yu (ユウ, Yū, 11): The daughter of Ijin of the Fu Clan, Yu is a rogue ninja who works to find any Tube relics that would reveal Zeba's true identity.
Lelai (レライ, Rerai, Movie):  A mermaid from the Sea of Tears, an underground lake formed from human tears over the millennia. Having a lovely singing voice, Igam deceives Lelai as part of a scheme involving Horn Doggler. Once Lelai learns the truth, she is forced to sing after Igam caused the Sea of Tears to dry up. Takeru manages to save her and takes her to the ocean to keep her alive.
Doctor Akira Yamagata (山形 晃 博士, Yamagata Akira-hakase, 21 & 22): The deceased creator of Galaxy Robo and a close friend of Chief Sugata. During the early development of the M-Project, Yamagata built Galaxy Robo by himself in order to provide the future Maskman team with another robot in addition to Sugata's Great Five. However, he died during a freak accident while testing out Galaxy Robo. Doctor Yamagata is survived by his only daughter, Yumi (由美), who believes that Galaxy Robo, which was programmed with a free will, was responsible for her father's death. However, Yamagata's recording during his final test run with Galaxy Robo proves that his death was entirely accidental and was not Galaxy Robo's fault.
Akaike (赤池, 28 & 29): The chief designer of the Jet Cannon. He loses consciousness as the final tests begin, due to the longterm effects of Deathga Doggler's attack when he was a child.
Kurokawa (黒川, 28 & 29): A member of the Jet Cannon development staff who assists Akaike. He is played by Kazuhiko Nishimura, who would go on to play Jō Ōhara in Chōjū Sentai Liveman.
Ryo Asuka (飛鳥 リョー, Asuka Ryō, 39): A former disciple of Chief Sugata who was chosen to be part of the M-Project, which gave him the ability to transform into X1 Mask (X1マスク, Ekkusu Wan Masuku), a predecessor to the main Maskman team. However, Ryo abandoned Sugata's unit after his girlfriend Yūko (ユウコ) was killed during an ambush by Tube, causing Ryo to doubt his ability to protect the world since he was unable to protect the woman he loved. Ryo arrives to help the Maskman team when they are overpowered by Magma Doggler. With Takeru's help, Ryo regain his self-confidence and assists the team in defeating Magma Doggler, but at the cost of his powers. At the end, he leaves the Maskman team to teach martial arts to children with a renewed sense of hope.
Mai Kozuki (40): A talented pianist who is actually from the Underground's Melme Family (メルメ), his music soothes the most savage of Underground monsters. Zeba orders the death of the family, and Mai is the sole survivor. Sugata saves her and brings her to the Maria Orphanage after rewriting her memories so she can live without her painful memories. Targeted by Bard Doggler, her hand is turned to stone and the Maskmen restore it.
Ise (11, 44 & 45): A rogue underground dweller who, along with her brother Teto, is part of a cult that worships the Underground Knight Unas. Though disillusioned when Unas is controlled by Igam, she and her brother help the Maskmen return their friend to normal.


=== Underground Empire Tube ===
The Underground Empire Tube (地底帝国チューブ, Chitei Teikoku Chūbu) is a peaceful underground empire that came into being five millennia ago under the rule of the Igam family. Once it comes under the rule of the usurper Zeba, Tube begins preparing for war on the surface. They are based at the Underground Castle (地帝城, Chiteijō) until Zeba has it destroyed.

Underground Emperor Zeba (地帝王ゼーバ, Chiteiō Zēba): Zeba is the leader of the underground Empire Tube. He hates all human beings and is a master of the Dark Aura, desiring to turn the surface into a cold and dark place. His true form is the monster Lethal Doggler The 2nd (リサールドグラーII世, Risārudogurā Nisei) whose father, the original Lethal Doggler, is killed by the Igam Family for terrorizing the underground. Before dying, it spawns an egg that results in Zeba's birth; the child devours his parent to become stronger. The new Lethal Doggler grows with nothing on his mind but revenge, disguising himself as Zeba and rule the Igam Royal Family. Upon assuming the throne, Zeba corrupts the underground into a violent kingdom and enslaves the underground humans. When he learns that his defeat was foretold to be at the hands of the surviving twin daughters of the Igam family, he keeps them apart while taking measures to ensure no one learns about his true identity, momentarily assumes his true form whenever someone gets too close to the truth. With Ial revived and his identity revealed, Zeba quickly enacts his final plan to raise the Underground Castle and spread his Dark Aura around the world to usher in an age of darkness at the cost of his followers. Once on the surface, Zeba battles the Maskmen personally in his Dark Aura domain. However, Ial and Igam augment their powers with the Maskmen's to negate his Dark Aura. Forced back into his true form, the Lethal Doggler is blasted by the Jet Cannon at full power, using the energies from the weapon to enlarge himself before being finally destroyed by the Galaxy Robo.
Underground Imperial Prince Igam (地帝王子イガム, Chiteiōshi Igamu): The older twin sister of Princess Ial, she is raised as a man to one day take the throne until Zeba overthrew her parents. As a result, Ial is spared to serve under Zeba as one of his prized warriors. She is trained in the way of combat by the Fu Clan and uses the dragon gauntlets on her forearms to execute attacks. When Ial falls in love with Takeru, Igam feels her sister is a disgrace to their family, and vows to kill Takeru. She also has a desire to kill Ial for her transgression, but she cannot carry it out under orders from Zeba himself. One of her attempts in killing Takeru involves conjuring the Death Ring, a family tradition where the user uses up their energy to project an electrified force field. When Baraba gains the Royal Underground Sword, Igam is forced to turn to the Igam Dragon for aid. When Akira is restored from being Unas, Igam's identity as a woman is revealed to the Maskmen. Takeru then hesitates to fight her and attempts to reason with her. After she is given permission to kill her sister, Igam learns the truth behind Zeba and is conflicted until she learns that he used her to achieve his goal. Disillusioned and seeing herself beyond redemption, Igam finds a new reason to live when she sees the Buddha as she helps the Maskmen defeat Zeba. Soon after, Igam becomes a Buddhist nun to repent for her sins, and leaves her sister to become the new heir to the Igam kingdom.
Underground Curiosities Beast Anagmas (地奇地奇獣アナグマス, Chiki Chikijū Anagumasu, 1–50): He is an overweight beast who is three centuries old and knows all, a master of dark arts who uses a croquet mallet as his weapon. As Zeba's advisor, he is able to freely access the Underground Library, which contains the history of the Tube civilization. Normally remaining at the sidelines, Anagmas first reveals himself to the Maskmen prior to setting up a scheme to remove Great Five. Later, he learns the truth about Zeba and is sent to kill Ial. Anagmas is killed by the Maskmen with the Jet Cannon and the Galaxy Robo.
Underground Imperial Commander Baraba (地帝指令バラバ, Chitei Shirei Baraba, 1–48): A cold-blooded, sadistic and merciless skilled swordsman and strongman of the Baluga tribe and is a rival of Igam. He carries a heavy blade that only he is strong enough to use in battle. When sentenced to death by Zeba for his failure, he goes to the Underground Dungeon to kill the Devil Doggler and obtain the Royal Underground Sword. He lost the fight until he is driven mad by his mother's death at the hands of the monster, killing the monster with the Royal Underground Sword. Later, after failing to revive the War God, Baraba gets one last chance to redeem himself. He makes a deal with Kiros and kidnaps Princess Ial to lure Takeru into a trap. Once the plan falls apart, and Oyobu turns his back on him, Baraba is killed by Red Mask in a final duel.
Underground Imperial Ninja Oyobu (地帝忍オヨブー, Chiteinin Oyobū): A ninja of the Buyon tribe with red skin and large pointy ears who serves under Baraba. He can throw life-manifested fire from his hands and run at near-lightspeed. While pleading with his master not to take Ial, he ends up being frozen but manages to thaw himself out. Though he comes to his master's aid, Oyobu refuses to aid Baraba in his final fight. Though he learns the truth about Zeba and discovers that he is nothing more than an expandable pawn, Oyobu continues his part in the fiend's plan in sacrificing the Underground Castle as he is consumed in the resulting explosion.
Underground Imperial Ninja Fumin (地帝忍フーミン, Chiteinin Fūmin): A Kunoichi of the Fu clan, a group of ninja who have served under the Igam family for generations. She is able to shoot shurikens and fire from her mouth, Fumin's abilities rival those of Haruka. She assumes guises like that of the idol Marina Shimada during Igam's plan of turning humans into Unglers. Though she learns her mistress' identity, Fumin remains by Igam's side until she is killed in the Underground Castle while protecting Igam when the castle is being destroyed.
Energy Beast Okelampa (エネルギー獣オケランパ, Enerugījū Okeranpa): A Mole cricket-like creature that emerges when the monsters of the Tube Empire are defeated by the Maskmen. With its ray, the Doggler monsters are enlarged as Okelampa utters Phew, Oh goodness! (ふぅ〜、やれやれ, Fū, yareyare!) before taking his leave. Okelampa's fate is never revealed.
Ungler Soldiers (アングラー兵, Angurā Hei): The black-skinned foot soldiers with vines covering their faces. Their name derives from "underground".


==== Kiros ====
Thief Knight Kiros (盗賊騎士キロス, Tōzoku Kishi Kirosu, 27–49): A wandering undergrounder under no one's authority who is relentless in getting what he wants. Kiros sees Ial's beauty and attempts to make her his own. He saves her from Hell's Wind chasm but falls down into the pit. After managing to escape Hell's Wind by mastering the Crescent Screw, Kiros attacks the Maskmen, requesting Ial in exchange for aiding Tube. He learns about Takeru's relationship to Ial and Kiros became Igam's rival in trying to kill Red Mask. Kiros tricks Baraba and spirits Ial's frozen prison into Hell's Wind to break her free. Mortally wounded in an attempt to protect her, Kiros dies as he realizes that Ial is the only thing he could never have.


==== Others ====
Princess Ial (イアル姫, Iaru-hime): She is the twin sister of Igam, sent by Tube as a spy above ground under the name of Mio (美緒, Mio). Once on the surface, Ial meets and falls in love with Takeru. When Tube's forces are ready to attack, she warns Takeru, but is captured by Igua. Brought before Zeba, Ial is sentenced to the Eternal Freeze, living in an endless nightmare while encased in ice. Thanks to Kiros' actions, Ial is freed from her prison and helps the Maskmen destroy Zeba. She is forced to leave Takeru to fulfill her duties as the new empress, though she still has feelings for him. She has him promise to look towards the future.
Lalaba (ララバ, Raraba, 30): Baraba's mother, who raised him on the ideologies of the Baluga tribe. She tricks Akira into taking her to his son. Laraba attacks the Devil Doggler and wounds the beast enough for her son to finish the job, though she dies by its hand. She was played by Machiko Soga who previously portrayed Queen Haedrian in the 1980 Series Denshi Sentai Denjiman and its 1981 Sequel Taiyou Sentai Sun Vulcan, and later Played Witch Bandora in the 1992's Kyōryū Sentai Zyuranger and Heavenly Arch Saint Magiel in 2005's Mahou Sentai Magiranger.
Igam Dragon (イガム竜, Igamuryu, 31–50): The Igan Family guardian who follows the will of an Igam clansman. It is revived by Igam to help her fight the Maskmen. Once Ial is revived, the Igam Dragon secretly aids her by giving her the water mirror ball containing the truth about Zeba.


== Episodes ==
The Mysterious, Beautiful Runaway (美しき謎の逃亡者, Utsukishiki Nazo no Tōbōsha)
Strange! The Dark Underground Castle (怪奇！ 闇の地底城, Kaiki! Yami no Chiteijō)
The First Step into the Unknown (未知への第一歩！, Michi e no Daiippo)
Burn! F1 Spirits! (燃やせ！ F1魂！, Moyase! Efu Wan Tamashii!)
The Small Swordsman, Blue (小さな剣士ブルー, Chiisa na Kenshi Burū)
The God Hand of Dreams (夢のゴッドハンド, Yume no Goddo Hando)
Explode! Kenta's Love (爆発！ケンタの愛, Bakuhatsu! Kenta no Ai)
Burn! The Flower's Sword (燃えろ！花の剣！, Moero! Hana no Ken!)
Combine! Aura of Life (合体！命のオーラ, Gattai! Inochi no Ōra)
Igam vs. Takeru (イガムVSタケル, Igamu Tai Takeru)
The Refugee From Underground (地底からの亡命者, Chitei Kara no Bōmeisha)
A Challenge! The Pride of a Shinobi (挑戦！忍びの誇り, Chōsen! Shinobi no Hokori)
Chase the Idol! (アイドルを追え！, Aidoru o Oe!)
The Great Escape to the Blue Sky! (青空への大脱出！, Aozora e no Dai Dasshutsu!)
Farewell, Dear Flower! (さらば愛しき花よ！, Saraba Itoshiki Hana yo!)
Deadly! Blazing Baraba (必殺！炎のバラバ, Hissatsu! Honō no Baraba)
Smash it! The Maze of Hell (破れ！地獄の迷宮, Yabure! Jigoku no Meikyū)
The Dear Bloodsucking Doll! (愛しの吸血人形！, Itoshi no Kyūketsu Ningyō!)
Phantom Magic! Anagumas (妖魔！ アナグマス, Yōma! Anagumasu)
A Trap! The Sinking Giant Robot (罠！ 沈む巨大ロボ, Wana! Shizumu Kyodai Robo)
The Black Shadow of the Misty Valley (霧の谷の黒い影, Kiri no Tani no Kuroi Kage)
The Winds and Clouds of an Aura Storm! (風雲オーラの嵐！, Fūun Ōra no Arashi!)
Mio Who Has Become a Demon (悪魔になった美緒, Akuma ni Natta Mio)
The Grotto of the Young Monster (鍾乳洞の少年怪獣, Shōnyūdō no Shōnen Kaijū)
Akira's Lover!? (アキラの恋人！？, Akira no Koibito!?)
A Life That Disappeared on the Hot Sand! (熱砂に消えた命！, Nessa ni Kieta Inochi!)
Thief Knight Kiros! (盗賊騎士キロス！, Tōzoku Kishi Kirosu!)
Mio is Princess Ial!? (美緒がイアル姫！？, Mio ga Iaru-hime!?)
The New Lethal Weapon of Friendship (友情の新必殺武器, Yūjō no Shin Hissatsu Buki)
Mama!! Baraba's Scream! (ママ！！バラバの絶叫！, Mama!! Baraba no Zekkyō!)
It Appears! The Guardian Deity Igam Dragon (出現！守護神イガム竜, Shutsugen! Shugoshin Igamuryū)
Oyobu's Lethal Dash (オヨブー必殺走り, Oyobū Hissatsu Hashiri)
Takeru!! Cut Through Love! (タケルよ！愛を斬れ！, Takeru yo! Ai o Kire!)
Blues of Love and Murderous Intent (愛と殺意のブルース, Ai to Satsui no Burūsu)
The Mystery of Zeba! The Forbidden Tomb (ゼーバの謎！ 禁断の墓, Zēba no Nazo! Kindan no Haka)
Elimination! The Destructive Twin Girls (消滅！双子の破壊少女, Shōmetsu! Futago no Hakai Shōjo)
Soldiers Who Bet on Their Dreams (夢に賭ける戦士たち, Yume ni Kakeru Senshitachi)
The Time to Erase Takeru (タケルが消される時間, Takeru ga Kesareru Jikan)
Revival! The Mysterious X1 Mask (復活！謎のX1マスク, Fukkatsu! Nazo no Ekkusu Wan Masuku)
Resurrect! The Melody of Love (甦れ！愛のメロディー, Yomigaere! Ai no Merodī)
Female Thieves Haruka & Momoko (女強盗ハルカ&モモコ, Onna Gōtō Haruka to Momoko)
Fly! The Poem of a Timid Boy (翔べ！いじけ少年の詩, Kakebe! Ijike Shōnen no Shi)
Akira Loses His Eyesight! The Mysterious Spell (アキラ失明！ 謎の呪文, Akira Shutsumei! Nazo no Jumon)
Transform! Underground Empire Swordsman Akira (変身！ 地帝剣士アキラ, Henshin! Chitei Kenshi Akira)
Prince Igam! You're a Woman! (イガム王子！君は女！, Igamu-ōji! Kimi wa Onna!)
Counterattack! The Secret of the Demon Pond (逆襲！血の池の秘密, Gyakushū! Ma no Ike no Himitsu)
The Night Prior to the Attack! The Dance of Death (出撃前夜！ 死の踊り, Shutsugeki Zen'ya! Shi no Odori)
Baraba! Death for Treason (バラバ！裏切りに死す, Baraba! Uragiri ni Shisu)
The Revived Princess Ial (よみがえったイアル姫, Yomigaetta Iaru-hime)
Zeba! His Hair-Raising Secret Identity (ゼーバ！戦慄の正体, Zēba! Senritsu no Shōtai)
Great Destruction of Underground Empire Castle! (地帝城大崩壊！, Chitei Shiro Dai Hōkai!)


== Film ==
A film version of Hikari Sentai Maskman premiered on July 18, 1987 at the "Toei Manga Matsuri" film festival, where it was shown as part of a quadruple feature alongside Dragon Ball: Sleeping Princess in Devil's Castle, Saint Seiya: The Movie and the film version of Choujinki Metalder.


== International broadcasts ==


=== France ===
Marketed as the direct sequel to Choudenshi Bioman, the series was dubbed in French and broadcast as Bioman 2 in 1988.


=== Brazil ===
The series was broadcast on Rede Manchete (now RedeTV!) as Defensores da Luz Maskman - Maskman, Defenders of Light from 1991 to 1992. The last rerun was between January and October 1999, until episode 36.


=== Philippines ===
The series was dubbed in Filipino language as Laser Squadron Maskman and was first aired on IBC from 1988 to 1998.  It was one of the highest rated programs in the Philippines.  Like in France, it was also marketed as the sequel to Choudenshi Bioman, and became the first ever Sentai program to be broadcast with Filipino dubbing, it was titled Bioman 2 Maskman, after the airing of Uchuu Keiji Shaider, the country's first ever tokusatsu program to be aired in that language, in 1987-89.


=== Indonesia ===
In Indonesia, the series was first broadcast on RCTI in mid-1994-1995, rerun on SCTV in 1996-1997.  In September 2011, Indosiar planned to rerun the series.


=== Thailand ===
Maskman was also broadcast in Thailand on Channel 3 during 1989-1990.


=== Malaysia ===
The series was dubbed in Malay as Maskman on TV2 in the early 1990s.


=== Korea ===
In South Korea, Maskman was dubbed in Korean as Warriors of the Light Maskman (Korean: 빛의 전사 마스크맨, RR: Bichui Jeonsa Maseukeumaen).


== Cast ==
Takeru: Ryousuke Kaizu
Kenta: Kouichi Kusakari
Akira/Unas: Issei Hirota
Haruka: Yuki Nagata
Momoko: Kanako Maeda
Commander Sanjuurou Sugata: Hayato Tani
Ryo Asuka: Shinji Higashi (episode 39)
Emperor Zeba: Hideaki Kusaka
Prince (Princess) Igam, Princess Ial: Mina Asami
Commander Baraba: Keijiro Shiga
Oyubu: Yoshinori Okamoto
Kiros: Shunta Fuchino
Fumin: Koari Kubota
Hikari: Yoshiro Iwata
Doctor Catherine: Mimi Bruce (episode 3)
Laraba: Machiko Soga (episode 30)
Shinya: Toru Sakai (episode 32)
Lelai: Tomoko Ikeda (movie)
Narrator: Hiroshi Takeda


== Voice Actors ==
Emperor Zeba: Seizō Katō (voice)
Anagumas: Takuzo Kamiyama (voice)
Okelamp: Nobu Shinoda (voice)


== Songs ==
Opening theme"Hikari Sentai Maskman" (光戦隊マスクマン, Hikari Sentai Masukuman)
Lyrics: Masao Urino (売野 雅勇, Urino Masao)
Composition: Daisuke Inoue (井上 大輔, Inoue Daisuke)
Arrangement: Ohzuchi Fujita (藤田 大土, Fujita Ōzuchi)
Artist: Hironobu KageyamaMovie Opening theme"Shot Bomber Zenryoku Shūchū" (ショットボンバー全力集中, "Shot Bomber All Concentration Force")
Lyricist: Kazunori Sonobe
Composition: Takeshi Ike
Arrangement: Daito Fujita
Artist: Hironobu KageyamaEnding theme"Ai no Soldier" (愛のソルジャー, Ai no Sorujā, "Soldier of Love")
Lyrics: Masao Urino
Composition: Daisuke Inoue
Arrangement: Ohzuchi Fujita
Artist: Hironobu KageyamaIn both opening and ending themes in the Philippine dub of the series, it was composed by singer and composer Norman Caraan.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Hikari Sentai Maskman website (in Japanese)