Black Mask 2: City of Masks

Black Mask 2: City of Masks (黑俠II) is a 2002 Hong Kong action film directed by Tsui Hark. Andy On took over the role of Black Mask when original actor Jet Li opted not to return. The film also starred Tobin Bell, Jon Polito, Tyler Mane, Rob Van Dam, Traci Lords, and Scott Adkins


== Overview ==
Black Mask 2 is the sequel to the 1996 Black Mask. However, apart from the main character, the film is largely unrelated in story to the original film and follows Black Mask trying to find a cure for his supersoldier powers, all while being tracked by his creator, a giant brain (a detail at odds with the original film). The film also takes the tone of a fantastical superhero film, being set in a futuristic city, featuring a plot involving stopping a mutative DNA bomb and pitting the main character against a group of human-animal hybrid professional wrestlers.
Unlike the original film, which was in Cantonese and later dubbed into English, Black Mask 2 was predominantly produced in English. The film was later released dubbed into Cantonese in Hong Kong in 2003, with Andy Lau being featured as a narrator for the Hong Kong version.


== Plot ==
Kan Fung had escaped from the clutches of the organization responsible for his superhuman abilities. He plans to find any geneticist who will be able to cure him. Meanwhile, he has decided to use his powers for the greater of good, calling himself Black Mask. Lang, another high-ranking member of the organization, has been hired to find Black Mask and kill him.
Wrestling promoter King is gearing up for a major event and has his top wrestlers Claw, Iguana, Chameleon, Snake, and Wolf ready for battle. However, when the wrestler Hellraiser (real name Ross) is attacked by Iguana, who undergoes a radical transformation to look like an iguana-human hybrid, Black Mask comes to the rescue. Ross is seriously injured and Black Mask chases Iguana to a nearby Tower. When Iguana falls off, Black Mask catches his hand in hopes that he can help him. Iguana lets himself free of Black Mask's grip and falls to his death, angering Chameleon, who was Iguana's girlfriend. It is soon revealed that the wrestlers had been experimented under Dr. Moloch, who gave the wrestlers animal DNA to enhance their skills. However, they soon discover the animal DNA have given them the ability to undergo transformations as animal-hybrids. They now intend to use their newfound abilities to track down Black Mask and kill him to avenge Iguana.
Meanwhile, Black Mask has found the geneticist who may be able to cure him, Dr. Marco Leung. He would give her anonymous phone calls. In the meantime, Black Mask befriends Raymond, Ross's young son who idolizes both his father as well as Black Mask. When Black Mask scuffles with some of the wrestlers, he is given a dose of animal DNA, which turns him into a tiger-hybrid. Locating Dr. Leung, Black Mask warns her of the DNA and asks for her help. She learns of a chemical component that could be the key to cure the animal DNA for Black Mask. Sneaking out, Black Mask has another scuffle with the wrestlers but successfully finds the chemical needed for the animal cure. Fully cured of at least his animal DNA, Black Mask learns that his old nemesis Lang has killed Moloch and has planted a bomb that has the capability of changing DNA throughout the city. Black Mask takes on all of the wrestlers as well as Lang's top man, General Troy. While taking on Chameleon, he finally reveals how Iguana actually killed himself and that he had intended to help him. Feeling remorse, Chameleon sacrifices herself to help Black Mask. Finally, Lang takes on Black Mask. At first Lang has the upper hand, but Black Mask successfully defeats Lang and stops the bomb from exploding.
The next day, Dr. Leung receives a call from Kan Fung. She leaves the lab and gets on the back of Kan's motorcycle, which implies she has finally cured him of his original superhuman abilities.


== Cast ==
Andy On - Kan Fung/Black Mask
Teresa Maria Herrera - Dr. Marco
Tobin Bell - Dr. Moloch
Tyler Mane - Thorn
Oris Erhuero - Wolf
Scott Adkins - Dr. Lang
Sean Marquette - Raymond
Traci Lords - Chameleon
Jon Polito - King
Andrew Bryniarski - Daniel Martinez/Iguana
Rob Van Dam - Claw
Roger Danuarta - Billy
Robert Allen Mukes - Snake
Silvio Simac - Troy
Michael Bailey Smith - Ross/HellraiserOris Erhuero, Traci Lords, and Jon Polito have all been involved in the Highlander Franchise.
The film was the first on-screen appearance of Andy On, but it was actually the second film On had shot. The first film he worked on, Looking for Mister Perfect, was released after this film in 2003.


== Release ==
Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment released straight to DVD in the United States on December 24, 2002. The film was released theatrically in Hong Kong on January 9, 2003.


== Cantonese voice cast ==
Andy Lau - Narrator
Louis Koo - Thorn
Lau Ching-wan - Wolf
Jordan Chan - Lang
Cecilia Cheung - Raymond
Cherrie Ying - Chameleon
Chapman To - King
Michael Tse - Iguana
Patrick Tam - Claw
Raymond Wong Ho-yin - Snake


== External links ==
Black Mask 2: City of Masks on IMDb
Black Mask 2: City of Masks at AllMovie