Black Rose (BDSM organization)

Black Rose is a pansexual educational and support group for the  BDSM community in the Washington, D.C. area. It was founded in June 1987, was the center of the local BDSM community for almost 20 years, and continues to this day.
Black Rose hosts regular educational classes addressing BDSM activities, issues, and safety, currently at The Crucible, Washington's longstanding BDSM club, in Washington, DC. For most of its history, the group has also hosted monthly socials whose emphasis have varied over time from hands-on educational workshops to social play parties. 
Black Rose is governed by a board of directors elected by its membership.  In 2002, one of the group's founders, Jack McGeorge, was "outed" by news articles using his activities as one element of an argument that he had not been appropriately vetted for his national security-related position.
From 1997 through 2012, the organization held hotel-based conventions that included educational sessions, vendor rooms and play parties. For much of that time, the events were annual and by 2000 had grown to be among the largest such events held on the East Coast.
Annual events continued through 2009. The group's last large event was held in 2012 to celebrate its 25th anniversary. The increased prominence of the internet, and especially the founding of the social networking site Fetlife in 2008, allowed alternative sexuality groups to multiply and flourish. This further diminished Black Rose's central position in the Washington BDSM community, although it remains a significant presence. It is an especially important resource for newcomers to BDSM, for whom its educational emphasis is both practical and less intimidating than other points of entry.


== Special interest groups ==
Black Rose includes several special interest groups (SIGs):
Bondage
Cultural, Arts & Theatre Social (CATS)
Domination & Submission (D/s)
Hypnosis
New and Curious Kinksters (NaCK)
Tethers and Feathers, for those interested in tickling


== Awards ==
Among its other activities, Black Rose annually grants awards:
Jack McGeorge Excellence in Education
Membership Service Award


== Similar organizations ==
The Eulenspiegel Society (New York City)
Society of Janus (San Francisco)
Portland Leather Alliance (Oregon)


== References ==

Salon Health, Nov. 30, 1999: Crashing the Black Rose. "In a suburban Ramada Inn, 1,500 players gathered to teach and discuss the sexual art of power and pain." By Virginia Vitzthum
It's Not About the Whip: Love, Sex, and Spirituality in the Bdsm Scene, Sadie, ISBN 1-4120-0183-8


== External links ==
Official website