International Federation of Sports Chiropractic

The International Federation of Sports Chiropractic (French: Federation Internationale de Chiropratique du Sport or FICS)  is an international organization which promotes sports chiropractic around the world. It is composed of national sports chiropractic councils, or the national associations, from many countries such as Australia, Canada, Chile,  Japan, Mexico, Spain, Turkey, United States, and the United Kingdom.


== Issues International Credential ==
FICS has developed a post-graduate professional qualification in sports chiropractic, the Internationally Certified Chiropractic Sports Practitioner/or Physician (Depending on the laws of the jurisdiction in which the Doctor practices) (ICSSP) which is a requirement for a chiropractor to participate as a FICS sports chiropractor at an international event.


== Awards and honors ==
The FICS Executive Board, also from time to time, bestows various awards upon individuals who have, in their opinion made considerable contributions to the professional specialty of sports chiropractic. These have included, the "Sports Chiropractor of the Year"; and the "Highest Award that can be bestowed upon a sports Chiropractor, Internationally, the FICS' Gold Medal. And, in 2011 at the World Chiropractic Congress, in Rio de Janeiro, they awarded the "FICS' Founder's Award" to Dr. Stephen Press, their founder and 1st President.


== FICS Doctors working Pro Bono ==
FICS has promoted the participation of chiropractors in sports medicine teams, and has organized chiropractors to provide treatment at many national and international sporting events including the winter and summer Olympics. It has held Congresses in Mexico City, Rome, New Jersey, Wash. DC, Australia, Iowa, Montreal, and Tokyo; and sent delegations to Moscow, Africa, and Caracas.


== Formation and Organization ==
FICS was formed in 1987, and has its headquarters in the Maison du Sport Internationale in Lausanne, Switzerland. It also maintains an administrative office in Toronto, Canada at the World Federation of Chiropractic.The Presidents of FICS are:


== Recognition ==
ICSSPE - FICS is a member of the Associations' Board of the International Council of Sport Science and Physical Education
SportAccord - Associate member of international sports accrediting agency SportAccord (the former GAISF).
UNESCO - Affiliate of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
IWGA International World Games Association, in contract with FICS to provide all medical services at World Games.


== Events ==
FICS Chiropractors have provided treatment at events including:

African Championships in Athletics (1988)
African Championships in Athletics (1990)
All-Africa Games (1991)
World Track and Field Championships (1991)
XVIth Winter Olympic Games  (1992)
All-Africa Games (1999)
Gunston 500 International Surfing Competition (1998)
Ontario Games (2000)
Maritime Life Olympic Trials (2000)
Canadian Paralympic Trials (2000)
World Surfing Games (2000)
Summer Olympics (2000)
Mediterranean Games (2001)
XIXth Central American and Caribbean Games (2002)
Winter Olympics (2002)
World Games (2005)
Summer Olympics (2008)
World Games (2009)
PanAm Games (2011)
World Games (2013)


== References ==


== External links ==
International Federation of Sports Chiropractic (FICS)