Heloise (Jimmy Two-Shoes)

Jimmy Two-Shoes (also known as JTS; known as Jimmy Cool in most parts of Europe) is a Canadian animated television series that aired on Disney XD in the USA, Teletoon in Canada, and Jetix in the United Kingdom (by August 19, 2009, rebranded as Disney XD). The series were centered on the exploits of the happy-go-lucky title character, who lives in Miseryville, a miserable town filled with monsters and demon-like creatures. The series were created by Edward Kay and Sean Scott.
The series originally premiered on February 21, 2009 on Canada, with the final episode premiered on April 5, 2012; though, broadcasts were still run until December 2017. In the US, it premiered on February 13 the same year, ending its run on July 15, 2011, spanning 2 seasons. In the UK, it began broadcasting on 18 April 2009 on Jetix, with later episodes and Season 2 premiering after the Disney XD rebrand. Reruns were being shown on the channel until 2017.


== Premise ==
The series follows the adventures of 14-year-old Jimmy, a happy-go-lucky teen who makes it his mission to find fun everywhere he goes. This is a challenge because Jimmy lives in Miseryville, the unhappiest town around, run by the megalomaniacal Lucius Heinous the Seventh. Miseryville has one main industry: Misery Inc., purveyors of putrid products guaranteed to cause grief; and they do not come with a money-back guarantee. Along with his best friends Heloise (part-time genius, full-time soul-crusher who secretly adores him) and Beezy (adventure lover, couch potato, and Jimmy's definitive best friend), Jimmy is determined to surf past all obstacles and bring his infectious enthusiasm to the whole town.


== Characters ==


== Locations ==
Miseryville - The town under the control of Lucius Heinous VII. Its purpose is to sustain the lowest quality of life possible. The planet Miseryville is on (and Miseryville may be the entire planet) is shaped like the Miseryville logo, and it has a red sky and three suns. Its inhabitants are mostly monsters except for Jimmy and Heloise who are pretty much the only humans there. Lucius's factory overshadows the town. The town is surrounded by tall mountains, grassy meadows, forests, and volcanoes. It seems as though all of the lakes and other places that should contain water contain lava instead but the characters are able to swim in them without burning up (usually). Although it is stated that it has never snowed in Miseryville "Invasion of the Weavils" shows Jimmy going to two different places that have snow and ice. There are screens and cameras that Lucius (and occasionally Samy or Heloise) use to communicate to Miseryvillians all over town, some hidden in the most unlikely places, such as cakes and trees. Although the town is considered a terrible place to live it does have fun places like theaters, swimming pools, beaches etc. (although they all seem to have some horrible twist). There was once what appeared to be a school in the episode "Scent of a Heinous" during an ad for Heinous Perfume, complete with buses, search lights, chain gates, lockers, and a total of three girls. It was never shown again.
Misery Inc. - A huge factory run by Lucius, which resembles a large face. The workers in the factory make various products intended to make people miserable. The factory is destroyed in many episodes and it's almost always Jimmy's fault. Heloise has a laboratory there, Lucius has an office where he lives most of the time, there is a huge "conference room", and there are T.V.s and cameras everywhere. Many monsters work there against their will and get no time off, no pay and no benefits from their jobs.
Clownburg. - A part of Miseryville where the Rodeo Clowns live.
The Abyss of Nothingness - Seen in a few episodes, it is said to be a vast black hole filled with misery and despair from which no one can escape. Although almost everyone who has been thrown into it appears in later episodes with no explanation of how they got out. Lucius tries to use it to get rid of Jimmy and Heloise. On Lucius' birthday it is renamed "The Birthday Abyss of Nothingness" and has a party hat floating over the top. And During a race between Jimmy and Beezy they run into it only to reappear only seconds later with Beezy wearing a parka and Jimmy wearing traditional Mexican clothing.
Jimmy's House - Is seen in many episodes as a simple white house with a red roof, two windows, and a light red door. There are two trees standing beside it. Jimmy's house is between Beezy's and Heloise's house. Their house's are separated by hedges. (Jimmy and Beezy can be seen playing game such as 'Ultra Target'; a game where one player catapults another player towards a giant circular board with different colored squares on it. Different 'Bonus Points' are given depending on the day of the week.) When chained to the side of the house, Cerbee will sometimes drag Jimmy's house away, usually bringing it back after a few days. Jimmy's bedroom, shown in few scenes, is extremely large.
Beezy's House - Usually shown to be a big messy pile of junk inside. In 'The Butley Did It' Beezy hires a butler named 'Butley' to clean it. After doing so, many different treasures are found, such as a skateboard half-pipe and a coffee table. It is also shown that there is a cannon in his house, as he fires himself out of it in one episode. In Bus Driving BFF Chuck describes it as the most dark and disgusting place in Miseryville. Beezy's house is a unique place with its skull-like appearance and horns. Two windows resemble eyes on its gray surface. It looks extremely similar to his father's house. A ghost made up of rejected pizza crusts that Beezy never ate also lives there, until Beezy ate him.
Heloise's House - Heloise's house is a tall blue building. It is filled with traps and gadgets that are usually triggered by Jimmy and/or Beezy. Despite the traps her house is basically normal on the inside. The living room is very large with a fireplace and a couch. Behind a bookcase there is a secret shrine to Jimmy, although it is shown in Pet Rocky it can be entered through the fireplace. The bedroom is colored blue with a blue bed. Contrary to her personality, there are many girly things about her house such as a pink computer and other various decorations. The back yard is filled with tomb stones. There is also a barbecue in the back yard, which she uses quite often.
Miseryville Beach - A beach beside an ocean of lava. Most people don't swim in it because it's filled with sea monsters, And Under the sand are lava worms which eat the citizens.
The Chocolate Lake - A hidden lake of chocolate under Misery Inc. Lucius has forbidden anyone to even touch it, but in the episode "There Will Be Chocolate" it was discovered by Jimmy, Beezy and Heloise.
Miseryville Golf Course - A mini golf course that was built on a volcano.
Misery Island - A popular vacation spot that is only visited during Spring Break. It has two sides; one pleasant and nice, and the other evil and deadly.


== Awards ==
Jimmy Two Shoes was nominated for 2 awards for best animated series or program and best performance in an animated series or program at the 2011 Gemini awards.


== Episodes ==


== Broadcast ==
Jimmy Two Shoes is shown in Canada on Teletoon in the English and French-language channels, the last one broadcasting the series with the name of Jimmy l'Intrépide. In the US, it aired on Disney XD premiering on February 13, 2009. The show aired in Australia on Cartoon Network and in Latin America on Nickelodeon starting in 2009. The New Zealand premier was in 2010 on TVNZ. The show began broadcasting in the UK and Ireland on April 18, 2009 on Jetix, in pair with the show's premiere in the rest of Europe on the same channel. In most of Europe, the series is called Jimmy Cool; in Italy, Jimmy Jimmy, and in France it's Jimmy l'Éclate.
Reruns are being carried by Boomerang in Australia and New Zealand since October 6, 2014. It was also aired on CITV's Toonattik Programming Block in the UK. 
In the Philippines, it premiered on June 2017 on TV5 inside the Boomerang on TV5 block, dubbed in Filipino.


== References ==


== External links ==
Full credits for "Jimmy Two Shoes"
Jimmy Two-Shoes on IMDb
Jimmy Two-Shoes at epguides.com
Jimmy Two-Shoes at TV.com