Parkside High School, Dundas

Parkside High School was located at 31 Parkside Avenue, Dundas, Ontario, and was a member of the Hamilton-Wentworth District School Board (HWDSB). The school opened in 1960 and backed onto the Dundas escarpment. Parkside High School had a 2009-2010 enrollment of 700, and reported that 80% of its graduates attend post-secondary education.[1] The school's mission statement was "Educating students to become lifelong learners and contributing citizens in a challenging, changing, multi-cultural world."  The school also offered special education classes and had an ESL program.
In 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 Parkside High School was noted as the school with the most involved students in HWDSB according to Director Malloy's Annual Report.The HWDSB announced on 15 May 2012 that Parkside High School would close in 2014, citing over $5 million in repair costs and almost 200 empty seats. The students attending Parkside were moved to Dundas Valley Secondary School, which will receive $15 million for renovations if approved by the Ministry of Education.Parkside closed in June 2014 at the end of the 2013/2014 school year. Demolition of the school began in January 2017.


== Curriculum focus ==
Parkside had a curriculum goal of decreasing the failure rate in all classes by 3% (most courses were in excess of 85% pass rate).  Parkside has developed programs such as DECA (Business Competition) courses, a science course based on crime scene investigation techniques, and Spanish classes to pique student interest.


== Program Highlights and Student Support Programs ==
Parkside High School took part in the following programs:

Canadian Mathematics Competitions
Vast variety of Physical Education options, including basketball focus, navy seals and outdoor education.
International Languages
DECA Business courses
Debate Club
Grade 9 assistance program
Panther Pack program
Early identification and assistance for at-risk learners
Ontario Secondary School Literacy Test preparation and assistance
Credit Recovery and Alternative Education courses


== Clubs ==
The former Parkside High School offered the following clubs:

Ambassadors
Anti-racism
Art
Art festival
Book
Debating
DECA
Drama
Environmental
Faith
Field Hockey
French Movie
Garden
Gay–straight alliance
Interact
Literary Festival
Math Contests
Media
Music
Panther Packs
PAVEAT
Photography
Science
Sears Festival
Yearbook
Badminton
Baseball
Basketball
Cross Country
Garden Club
Hockey – Boys and Girls
Rugby
Soccer
Swimming
Tennis
Track and Field
Volleyball
Water polo


== Notable alumni ==
Karen Bertelsen (TV Personality)
Dianne Bos (Photographer)
Graeme MacKay (Editorial Cartoonist)
Colleen McEdwards (News Anchor)
Daniel Victor Snaith (Musician)


== References ==