List of The Powerpuff Girls characters

This is a list of secondary characters that appeared on the American animated television series The Powerpuff Girls, which aired on Cartoon Network. All of the characters on this list appear more than once in the series, and contribute to the episode plotlines.


== Major secondary characters ==


=== Professor Utonium ===
Professor Utonium (voiced by Tom Kane) is a scientist who works in his home in the suburbs of the City of Townsville, and the Powerpuff Girls' creator and father. A stereotypical scientist, his general attire is a white lab coat and black pants. The Professor once housed a chimpanzee named Jojo (later to become Mojo Jojo) as a lab assistant who proved to be reckless and destructive. While the Professor was stirring his perfect girl concoction, Jojo shoved him, causing him to accidentally break a flask containing the mysterious "Chemical X" which spilled into the formula, thus creating the Powerpuff Girls. The Professor is a genius in many fields of science, having shown knowledge in fields such as physics, chemistry, and biology as well as being a skilled inventor. Aside from his role as a scientist, he acts as a parent to the Powerpuff Girls. Although he apparently did not legally "adopt" the girls, everyone who addresses him calls him "their father" and they as "his daughters". The Professor can be strict, easily manipulated and overprotective at times, but still retains his caring fatherly image. In the episode "Keen for Keane", the girls set up Professor Utonium and their kindergarten teacher Ms. Keane on a date for Valentine's Day, resulting in the two temporarily becoming an item.


=== Mayor ===
 The Mayor of Townsville (voiced by Tom Kenny in the series and by Jim Cummings in the What a Cartoon! episodes) is generally referred throughout only as "Mayor", although he is referred to as "Barney" by his wife in the episode "Boogie Frights". He is short and elderly with a fringe of white hair around a bald scalp and a thick white mustache. He wears a monocle over his left eye and a small top hat that “floats” just above his head. The Mayor is rather dimwitted, but cares deeply about his city. He has a love for pickles, and is very childish at times. He sometimes calls the girls for very silly reasons, as seen in the episode "Bubblevicious" when he calls because of a traffic jam. The What a Cartoon! episode "Meat Fuzzy Lumpkins" featured a different Mayor who was younger and taller than the Mayor of the series.


=== Ms. Bellum ===
Ms. Sara Bellum (voiced by Jennifer Martin in the series) is the Mayor's secretary, who often handles issues that the Mayor cannot. She has long, curly red hair, wears a red dress and red high heel shoes for a secretary look. Her face is never fully shown onscreen, although The Powerpuff Girls Rule!!! revealed part of it. Running gags include other onscreen characters often finding her attractive, the camera focusing on her chest, and her face always being obscured. Her name is a pun on the word cerebellum presumably due to her intelligent and wise nature. She also proved to be a capable fighter, battling the villain Sedusa by herself when the girls were disabled. She appeared in one episode of the reboot before being written off due to female modifications.


=== Ms. Keane ===
Ms. Keane (voiced by Jennifer Hale and by Kath Soucie in the What-a-Cartoon! episodes) is the kindergarten teacher of Pokey Oaks Kindergarten. She wears an orange shirt, a red vest, brown pants, and has short black hair and light blue eyes. She is patient, wise, understanding, and protective of her students, making her a well-liked, motherly figure. She is also an animal lover, owning a ginger cat named Valentino, and the class pet hamster, Twiggy. Ms. Keane forbids any fighting in school, even if there is a crisis taking place within it; she convinces the girls that there are other ways to solve problems other than fighting as demonstrated in the episodes "Schoolhouse Rocked" and "Imaginary Fiend".


=== Narrator ===
Narrator (voiced by Tom Kenny in the series and Craig McCracken in Whoopass Stew and by Ernie Anderson in the What a Cartoon! episodes) is the enthusiastic but unseen narrator of the show. He often comments on the proceedings of the episode, says things which happen to be hints about the plots of certain episodes, and frequently breaks the fourth wall. He is also shown to be the only connection between the audience and the girls, as he can "talk" to both and even be involved, such as Mojo Jojo transforming him into a dog. In the episode "Simian Says", he is kidnapped by Mojo Jojo, who promptly takes his place as the episode begins.


=== Talking Dog ===
Talking Dog (voiced by Tom Kane in the series and by Paul Mercier in the What a Cartoon! episodes) is a small white dog with black ears and nose and a black spot on his back, wearing a red collar with a yellow dog tag. When he stays with the girls he is shown to be blunt, abrasive and insulting, though his demeanor remains straightforward and earnest. He is frequently abused in almost every appearance he makes; as a running gag, no one ever seems to regard his pain and simply ignores him.


=== Mitch Mitchelson ===
Mitch Mitchelson (voiced by Tom Kenny): The bully at Pokey Oaks Kindergarten. Mitch has brownish hair, and wears a black T-shirt with the words "MITCH ROCKS" on the front. Usually talks in a gruff voice; he torments the kids in the class in a few episodes, though he is not a major threat. He is Buttercup's close friend, according to Buttercup in her interview in the DVD features of The Powerpuff Girls Movie. For a brief time he hosted a short segment on Cartoon Network called "Mitch Rocks", where he looked at various things and said whether they "rock" or not.


== Villains ==


=== Mojo Jojo ===
Mojo Jojo (voiced by Roger L. Jackson) is a mad scientist anthropomorphic chimpanzee with great intelligence, who speaks with a Japanese accent in an overly redundant manner. As the main antagonist of the series and the Powerpuff Girls' arch-enemy, Mojo Jojo was Professor Utonium's reckless laboratory assistant, Jojo, before Professor Utonium created the Powerpuff Girls, the same accident that created the Girls gave Jojo his super-intelligence. He has green skin, pink scleras, and wears a white glass dome-shaped helmet that covers his oversized, protruding brain. He wears white gloves and boots, a blue suit with a white belt, and a flowing purple cape. Despite his high intelligence, his plans often contain flaws that he overlooks, and he rarely has much success against the girls, as their superpowers are too much for his inventions. However, he is a master at manipulation and trickery, often fooling the girls into thinking he has changed despite their constant encounters. Mojo lives in an observatory atop a dormant volcano located in the middle of Townsville's municipal park.


=== Him ===
Him (voiced by Tom Kane) is a mysterious, sinister, and effeminate demon. His physical appearance is an amalgamation of sorts with lobster-like claws, red skin, pointed ears, a hooked nose, yellow/green eyes, a long curled beard, wearing makeup, a woman's red jacket and skirt, and black boots. His voice ranges from a high-pitched falsetto to a deep, booming basso profondo. Him's plans are usually psychological in nature, and often consist of manipulating events to either drive the Powerpuff Girls insane or drive wedges between them. Craig McCracken has stated that the character "Him" was inspired by the mannerisms of the Chief Blue Meanie in the 1968 film Yellow Submarine. Craig McCracken stated Him is his favorite villain.


=== Fuzzy Lumpkins ===
Fuzzy Lumpkins (voiced by Jim Cummings) is a pink Bigfoot-like hillbilly monster with a wide jaw, a green nose, two antennas on his head, big blue overalls, and brown boots, who commonly plays a banjo which he calls "Jo." He was the first villain introduced in the series, appearing in the pilot "Meat Fuzzy Lumkins," in which he turned the people of Townsville into meat after he lost in a jam contest. He speaks in a southern accent, and lives in the woods next to Townsville. Fuzzy has a limited intellectual capacity, and is not nearly so active and ambitious as most of the villains in the series.  He usually limits himself to shooting anyone whom he finds trespassing on his property, though also prone to destructive fits of rage; when angry, Fuzzy turns dark red, grows claws, and his teeth become sharp fangs. Fuzzy (according to Professor Utonium's research) belongs to a race of "Lum(p)kins"; he has three siblings (Furry, Fluffy, and Hairy), three nephews (Buzzy, Wuzzy, and Scuzzy), and several dozen cousins who closely resemble him.


=== Princess Morbucks ===
Princess Morbucks (voiced by Jennifer Hale) is a spoiled, rich, and bratty little girl, whose partially unseen and mostly mute father allows her to finance various evil plots to destroy the Powerpuff Girls. Her supervillain outfit consists of a yellow, Powerpuff-style dress, black gloves and boots, and a tiara. Her hatred of the girls stems from her rebuffed attempt to become one of them. Her father is "Daddy" Morbucks, a large, rotund man whose face and head are always hidden from the viewer. He dotes on his daughter and usually indulges in her whims, but it is hinted that his patience is limited and Princess fears truly angering him. Thanks to him, Princess has access to virtually unlimited financial resources.


=== The Ganggreen Gang ===
The Ganggreen GangA are a gang of five teenage hoodlums who are green-skinned and unhealthy-looking, as though infected top-to-bottom by gangrene. Not possessing any powers or exceptional abilities, the Gang is normally not too much of a threat to the girls, but have shown themselves to be very dangerous when motivated. They also delight in tormenting those weaker than themselves, especially children and the elderly. The Ganggreen Gang lives in an old shack located in Townsville's junkyard.

Ace (voiced by Jeff Bennett): A mean-spirited, opportunistic rogue. He sports a slick-back hairdo, a colored vest-jacket, a peach-fuzz mustache, a pair of shades, and also has fangs. As the Gang's leader and their smartest member, he is the instigator of most of their antisocial activities, and he does possess a certain charismatic charm that allows him to sweet-talk people who ought to know better, such as Ms. Keane in the episode "School House Rocked" and even Buttercup in the episode "Buttercrush". He speaks in a nasally Italian/New Yorker accent. In 2018, Ace temporarily became the replacement bassist of the virtual band Gorillaz while Murdoc Niccals was in prison.
Snake (voiced by Tom Kenny in the series): A slippery character with a forked tongue, skinny body, and a hissing voice, Snake is the Gang's second-in-command, but this mostly makes him a yes-man to Ace. He does have a personality of his own, but it is usually silenced due to Ace punching him when he speaks out of line (or asks a foolish question). It is revealed in "School House Rocked" that his real name is Sanford D. Ingleberry.
Lil' Arturo (voiced by Tom Kenny and by Carlos Alazraqui in his first appearance): A malevolent Mexican midget boy, Lil' Arturo seems to take the most amusement from the Gang's activities. In the episode "School House Rocked" he carries around a switchblade-styled comb he calls "Maria", a treasured gift from his incarcerated father. He has a rather prominent underbite. His full name is Arturo de la Guerra, which is Spanish for "Arthur from the War". His small size allows him to sneak through cramped spaces and passages that the rest of the gang cannot reach.
Grubber (voiced by Jeff Bennett): A barefoot hunchback with untidy hair, grubby clothes, and protruding eyes. He also appears to be mostly mute, communicating instead through blowing a raspberry. He does, however, occasionally demonstrate unexpected talents, such as playing the violin, speaking eloquently or performing impersonations. When attending the girls' school for a short time, Grubber showed that he was able to horribly contort his body, making him briefly resemble a well-spoken and handsome-looking young man before snapping back to his normal self. His full name is Grubber J. Gribberish.
Big Billy (voiced by Jeff Bennett): A hulking, dimwitted colossus who acts as the Gang's muscle. Though he does at times display a childlike innocence, he mostly just does the bidding of his more savvy and vindictive friends. In the episode "School House Rocked", it is revealed that his real name is William W. Williams and that he is a cyclops, with his single eye hidden beneath his shaggy red hair. Although he rarely fares any better in combat against the girls than the rest of the gang, he has the muscular power to stop a speeding train from running down citizens from the track and tackle monsters to the ground with his bare hands. He is fiercely loyal to anyone he considers to be a friend, and briefly tried to help the Powerpuff Girls after they saved him from a train. However, his clumsiness and lack of intelligence made him more destructive as a hero than he was as a villain.


=== The Amoeba Boys ===
The Amoeba Boys (voiced by Chuck McCann in the series and the What a Cartoon! episodes and by Lou Romano in Whoopass Stew) are a trio of amoebae who are the villains featured in McCracken's original short, Whoopass Stew in A Sticky Situation. They reappear in the What a Cartoon! short Crime 101. With their gangster affectations, these aspiring criminals would love nothing more than to be regarded as serious villains worthy of fighting, and even getting beaten up and sent to jail by the Powerpuff Girls. Unfortunately, their brains are too primitive to devise a crime above the level of littering or jaywalking. Indeed, they considered stealing an orange to be their greatest crime ever in the episode "Divide and Conquer". They are Townsville's least malicious villains, even having a friendship-of-sorts with the girls. They are generally harmless, but their actions have on occasion endangered both the girls and the town by accident.

Bossman: The leader and general spokesman of the Amoeba Boys. He wears a gray fedora.
Junior: The smallest one of the Amoeba Boys. He wears a black cap and usually repeats whatever Bossman says. In the episode Crime 101, he is named Tiny.
Slim: The tallest one of the Amoeba Boys. He wears a brown fedora and is even more incompetent and slow than the other amoebas. In the episode Crime 101, he is called Skinny Slim.


=== Sedusa ===
Sedusa (voiced by Jennifer Hale in the series) is a young, beautiful Gorgon-like mistress of disguise and seductress who uses her feminine wiles to influence men to do her bidding, such as Professor Utonium, the Mayor, and the Ganggreen Gang. When her identity is revealed, she typically doffs down to her leotard battle suit and fights with her prehensile hair. Her eyes also change color depending on her mood. When she is acting benevolent her eye color is green, but when she is angry, revealing her true villainous nature, her eyes turn red. Similar to Ms. Bellum, Sedusa is absent from the reboot due to female modifications.


=== The Rowdyruff Boys ===
The Rowdyruff Boys are the male counterparts of the Powerpuff Girls created by Mojo Jojo using a mixture of "snips, snails, and a puppy dog tail" and toilet water in the Townsville Prison in the episode called "The Rowdyruff Boys". The Rowdyruff Boys are essentially violent bullies who have the same powers as the Powerpuff Girls, with their own techniques as well. They were ultimately destroyed when the girls kissed them. After being resurrected by Him in the episode "The Boys Are Back in Town", the Boys' hairstyles become noticeably spikier. The Boys wear long-sleeved shirts with a black stripe in each, black trousers and black, low-top sneakers with white laces and white soles.

Brick (voiced by Rob Paulsen in the series: Blossom's equivalent, he is the short-tempered self-proclaimed leader of the Rowdyruff Boys. He has an abrasive and rash attitude, which often causes conflict with his brothers. He wears a backwards red baseball cap compared to Blossom's bow. He also originally had bangs, which were replaced with long spiky hair when he was revived.
Boomer (also voiced by Paulsen in the series): Bubbles' equivalent, he is a loud-mouthed dunce, as opposed to Bubbles' naive sweetness, and has been known to like disgusting things. After his resurrection, Boomer is shown to be the least intelligent of the boys and he is often bullied and bossed around by his brothers. Boomer's hair parts in a curved fashion like Bubbles', but is longer and spiky on each end, in a wings haircut.
Butch (voiced by Roger L. Jackson in the series): Buttercup's equivalent. After his resurrection, Butch becomes more hyperactive and overly excited. Butch's hair is spiked upwards, abandoning his previous cowlick from his first appearance. He also shares Buttercup's small triangular hair parting.


== Notes ==
A.^  The name of this group of villains is the "Ganggreen Gang" (not Gangreen) according to Cartoon Network's Powerpuff Girls characters page.


== References ==