Jon Moxley

Jonathan David Good (born December 7, 1985) is an American professional wrestler and actor currently signed to All Elite Wrestling (AEW), where he performs under the ring name Jon Moxley and also makes appearances in New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW). Good is well known for his time with WWE, where he performed as Dean Ambrose from 2011 to 2019.
Good began his professional wrestling career in 2004 on the American independent circuit as Jon Moxley, working for various regional promotions including Full Impact Pro (FIP), Combat Zone Wrestling (CZW), and Dragon Gate USA (DGUSA). He won several top promotional championships, including the FIP World Heavyweight Championship once, the HWA Heavyweight Championship once, and the CZW World Heavyweight Championship twice.
After signing with WWE in 2010, Ambrose competed in their developmental territories Florida Championship Wrestling and NXT until 2012. He joined the main roster in November 2012 as a member of The Shield with Roman Reigns and Seth Rollins. Ambrose won his first championship in WWE, the United States Championship, while in the group, with his 351-day reign being the longest under the WWE banner. Following The Shield's breakup, Ambrose went on to become a one-time WWE Champion, a three-time Intercontinental Champion, and a two-time Raw Tag Team Champion (with Rollins). He was also the 2016 Money in the Bank ladder match winner. Upon winning the Raw Tag Team Championship in August 2017, Ambrose became WWE's 27th Triple Crown Champion and their 16th Grand Slam Champion.
Following his departure from WWE, Good made an unannounced appearance at AEW's premiere event, AEW Double or Nothing, reverting back to his Jon Moxley moniker. He also started working in NJPW shortly after his WWE exit and won the IWGP United States Championship in his NJPW debut, becoming the first and only wrestler to have held the WWE and IWGP United States championships.
Outside of wrestling, Good made his acting debut in the 2015 film 12 Rounds 3: Lockdown.


== Early life ==
Jonathan David Good was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, on December 7, 1985. An avid wrestling fan who idolized Bret Hart as a child, Good used wrestling as an escape from his rough upbringing by immersing himself in wrestling videotapes and reading stories about wrestling's earlier days. A year after beginning to train as a wrestler, he dropped out of high school.


== Professional wrestling career ==


=== Heartland Wrestling Association (2004–2010) ===

Good began working for Les Thatcher in the Heartland Wrestling Association (HWA) promotion as a teenager by selling popcorn and setting up the ring. He began training at the age of 18 as a professional wrestler under Thatcher and Cody Hawk. Using the ring name Jon Moxley, he made his debut in June 2004, losing his debut match to Ala Hussein. The following year, Moxley won the HWA Tag Team Championship twice, with Jimmy Turner and Ric Byrne respectively. He captured the HWA Heavyweight Championship twice in 2006 by defeating Pepper Parks on both occasions but lost the title to Chad Collyer and Brian Jennings respectively.From mid-2007 to early 2010, Moxley continued to work in the tag team division and held the HWA tag titles once with his trainer Cody Hawk and twice with King Vu. He won the HWA Heavyweight Championship for the third time from Aaron Williams in January 2010, before losing it to Gerome Phillips six months later.


=== Other promotions (2006–2011) ===

Moxley made three appearances in World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) from 2006 to 2007, on television shows Heat and Velocity, all of which resulted in losses. In September 2006, Moxley teamed with Hade Vansen to win the IWA World Tag Team Championship in the Puerto Rico based International Wrestling Association. They lost the titles to Chicano and Jeff Jeffrey in November, ending their reign at 69 days. Moxley also wrestled several dark matches for Ring of Honor (ROH) between 2007 and 2009. Moxley started working for Dragon Gate USA (DGUSA) in late 2009. He made his first televised appearance in March, where he defeated Tommy Dreamer in a hardcore match taped for the Mercury Rising pay-per-view. At the Uprising event in Mississauga, Ontario, Canada, Moxley suffered a legitimate injury where his left nipple was nearly severed during a match with Jimmy Jacobs. His last match in DGUSA was against Homicide in January 2011, which Moxley won.At Full Impact Pro's (FIP) Southern Stampede event on April 17, 2010, Moxley defeated Roderick Strong to win the vacant FIP World Heavyweight Championship. He held the title for 441 days before relinquishing it in July 2011, due to his signing with WWE. Moxley also won Combat Zone Wrestling's CZW World Heavyweight Championship twice in 2010 by defeating B-Boy and Nick Gage, respectively.


=== World Wrestling Entertainment/WWE ===


==== Developmental territories (2011–2012) ====

Good signed a developmental deal with WWE in April 2011 and joined its developmental territory Florida Championship Wrestling (FCW) under the name Dean Ambrose.Ambrose made his televised debut on the July 3 episode of FCW where he challenged FCW 15 Champion Seth Rollins. The following month, Ambrose and Rollins had a 20-minute non-title Iron Man match; the match ended in a draw with neither man scoring a fall. A 30-minute rematch, in which the title was on the line, took place in September which Rollins won through sudden death rules. At an FCW house show on October 21, Ambrose challenged WWE wrestler CM Punk, who was making a guest appearance, to a match in which Ambrose was defeated. Punk would later praise Ambrose after the match. On December 7, Ambrose competed at tapings for an unaired pilot for WWE NXT under the working title Full Sail Ahead at Full Sail University, where he was defeated by Leo Kruger.Ambrose feuded with William Regal from late 2011 to mid-2012. They wrestled twice during their feud where Regal won the first match, but the rematch ended in a no contest when Ambrose caused Regal to bleed from the ear. On the February 5, 2012 episode of FCW, Ambrose faced Rollins and Roman Leakee in a triple threat match to determine the number one contender for the FCW Florida Heavyweight Championship; the match however was won by Leakee. Ambrose competed in a dark match at the first tapings of NXT on May 17, in a loss to Xavier Woods. On an episode of FCW in June, Ambrose challenged Rollins for the FCW Florida Heavyweight Championship but lost.


==== The Shield (2012–2014) ====

In November 2012, Ambrose made his main roster debut at the Survivor Series pay-per-view event alongside Roman Reigns and Seth Rollins, as they delivered a triple powerbomb through an announce table to Ryback during the triple threat main event for the WWE Championship, allowing CM Punk to pin John Cena and retain the title. The trio declared themselves The Shield, showed villainous traits and routinely emerged from the crowd to attack Punk's adversaries, including Ryback and the WWE Tag Team Champions Team Hell No (Daniel Bryan and Kane). This led to a six-man Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match being set up for the TLC pay-per-view event on December 16, where Ambrose, Rollins, and Reigns defeated Team Hell No and Ryback in their debut match. The Shield continued to aid Punk after TLC, both on Raw and at the Royal Rumble in January 2013. The night after the Royal Rumble, it was revealed through footage that Punk and his manager Paul Heyman had been paying The Shield to work for them all along. The Shield then quietly ended their association with Punk. At Elimination Chamber in February, The Shield defeated Ryback, John Cena and Sheamus. At WrestleMania 29 in April, The Shield won their first WrestleMania match against Sheamus, Randy Orton and Big Show. Two weeks later on Raw, The Shield defeated Team Hell No and The Undertaker, which would lead to Ambrose making his singles debut against the Undertaker on the April 26 episode of SmackDown, which he lost by submission. On the May 13 episode of Raw, The Shield's undefeated streak as a unit ended in a disqualification loss against WWE Champion John Cena and Team Hell No.

At Extreme Rules, Ambrose won the United States Championship by defeating Kofi Kingston. He successfully defended the title the following two weeks with the help of Reigns and Rollins. On the June 14 episode of SmackDown, The Shield was given their first decisive loss, against Randy Orton and Team Hell No, when Daniel Bryan made Rollins submit. Two days later, Ambrose made his first pay-per-view defense of the United States Championship at Payback, where he defeated Kane by countout. The following month at Money in the Bank, he competed in the World Heavyweight Championship Money in the Bank ladder match but failed to win despite interference from Reigns and Rollins.Ambrose continued to retain his United States Championship against Rob Van Dam, Dolph Ziggler and Big E Langston at the SummerSlam, Night of Champions and Hell in a Cell pay-per-views respectively. At the Survivor Series pay-per-view, The Shield participated in a traditional Survivor Series match and Ambrose was the first man eliminated, while Reigns won the match as the sole survivor. At TLC in December, CM Punk defeated The Shield in a handicap match after Ambrose was accidentally speared by Reigns. Ambrose entered the 2014 Royal Rumble match on January 26 at number 11 and eliminated three participants, before being eliminated by Reigns. The following night on Raw, The Shield faced Daniel Bryan, John Cena, and Sheamus in order to earn their spot in the Elimination Chamber match for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship. The Shield lost after The Wyatt Family (Bray Wyatt, Erick Rowan, and Luke Harper) interfered, thus starting a feud between the two factions. The Shield would lose to The Wyatt Family at the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view, due to Ambrose abandoning his team midway through the match, thus creating further tension within the group.The Shield then began a feud with Kane in March, turning themselves fan favorites. As a result, they defeated Kane and New Age Outlaws (Road Dogg and Billy Gunn) at WrestleMania XXX on April 6. On April 28, Ambrose surpassed MVP as the longest-reigning United States Champion under the WWE banner. The Shield began feuding with Evolution (Batista, Randy Orton, and Triple H) and defeated them in a six-man tag team match at Extreme Rules. The following night on Raw, Triple H forced Ambrose to defend his United States Championship in a 20-man battle royal, which saw Ambrose surviving until the final two before ultimately losing to Sheamus, thus ending his title reign at 351 days. The Shield once again defeated Evolution at Payback in a No Holds Barred elimination match in June. The following night on Raw, Rollins betrayed Ambrose and Reigns and aligned himself with The Authority, breaking up the group.


==== Feud with Seth Rollins (2014–2015) ====

Ambrose promptly began feuding with Rollins, which included the duo interfering in each other's matches. During this period, Ambrose and Reigns quietly separated as a team, with Ambrose debuting new ring attire and new entrance music. Ambrose lost the 2014 Money in the Bank ladder match in which Kane attacked him, allowing Rollins to win. Ambrose was scheduled to face Rollins at Battleground on July 20, but he was ejected from the arena by Triple H after a pre-match brawl with Rollins backstage and Rollins subsequently announced that he had won their match by forfeit, prompting Ambrose to return to the arena and attack Rollins. Ambrose and Rollins eventually wrestled at SummerSlam on August 17 in a lumberjack match, which Ambrose lost after Kane again interfered and Rollins hit Ambrose with his Money in the Bank briefcase. The following night on Raw, Ambrose faced Rollins in a Falls Count Anywhere match, which Ambrose lost by knockout after interference from Kane once again. After the match, Rollins curb stomped his head through cinder blocks, causing him to take a short hiatus from WWE. Ambrose returned at Night of Champions in September and attacked Rollins. The duo faced off in a Hell in a Cell match the following month at the namesake event, where Ambrose lost again when the returning Bray Wyatt interfered and attacked him.

Ambrose then lost to Wyatt both at the Survivor Series and TLC pay-per-views. The two met for a third time in a Miracle on 34th Street Fight on the December 22 episode of Raw, which Ambrose again lost. The feud between the two concluded when Wyatt defeated Ambrose in an ambulance match on the January 5, 2015 episode of Raw. At the Royal Rumble on January 25, Ambrose participated in the Royal Rumble match but was eliminated by Big Show and Kane. He then attempted to win the Intercontinental Championship at Fastlane and at WrestleMania 31 but failed on both occasions. Ambrose defeated Luke Harper at Extreme Rules in a Chicago Street Fight on April 26, his first singles victory on a pay-per-view event since The Shield split up. The following night on Raw, Ambrose competed in the 2015 King of the Ring tournament, but was disqualified from the competition during his quarterfinal match with Sheamus, after interference from Dolph Ziggler.Ambrose returned to feud with WWE World Heavyweight Champion Seth Rollins, defeating him in a non-title match on the May 4 episode of Raw and was added to Rollins's championship defense at Payback against Randy Orton and Roman Reigns. Rollins would retain his championship. At Elimination Chamber on May 31, Ambrose defeated Rollins by disqualification for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship but did not win the title. Despite the loss, Ambrose stole the title belt from him and challenged Rollins to a ladder match for the championship at Money in the Bank on June 14, which he narrowly lost.After Money in the Bank, Ambrose teamed up with Roman Reigns to defeat Wyatt and Harper at SummerSlam. The following night on Raw, Ambrose and Reigns fought Wyatt and Harper in a SummerSlam rematch, during which Braun Strowman made his WWE debut, helping Harper and Wyatt. At Night of Champions on September 20, Ambrose, Reigns and a returning Chris Jericho were defeated by Wyatt, Harper, and Strowman in a six-man tag team match. Following Seth Rollins's injury, which forced him to vacate the WWE World Heavyweight Championship in November 2015, Ambrose entered a 16-man tournament to determine a new champion. After defeating Tyler Breeze in the first round, Dolph Ziggler in the quarterfinals and Kevin Owens in the semifinals, Ambrose ultimately made it to the finals at the Survivor Series main event on November 22 but lost to Reigns.


==== Championship reigns (2015–2017) ====

In December, Ambrose won the Intercontinental Championship for the first time after defeating Owens at TLC. He successfully defended the title against Owens and Ziggler multiple times between December and January 2016. Ambrose then became the runner-up in the 2016 Royal Rumble match for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship, being lastly eliminated by eventual winner Triple H. The following night on Raw, Ambrose was announced as part of a triple threat match against Reigns and Brock Lesnar at Fastlane, with the winner facing Triple H for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship in the main event of WrestleMania 32. On the February 15 episode of Raw, Ambrose was forced to defend the Intercontinental Championship in a five-way match and lost the championship when Owens pinned Tyler Breeze.After losing the match at Fastlane when he was pinned by Reigns, Ambrose challenged Lesnar to a No Holds Barred street fight match at WrestleMania 32, which Paul Heyman accepted on Lesnar's behalf. On the February 29 episode of Raw, Ambrose interrupted Triple H by issuing a challenge for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship at Roadblock on March 12, which Triple H accepted; however, Ambrose was unsuccessful at the event. He also ended up losing against Lesnar at WrestleMania 32. Following this, Ambrose began a rivalry with Chris Jericho. He defeated Jericho both at Payback, in a normal match, and at Extreme Rules in an Asylum match (a steel cage match with weapons hanging above the cage and a stipulation where escape from the cage was not allowed or would not allow for victory).

On the May 23 episode of Raw, Ambrose defeated Dolph Ziggler to qualify for the Money in the Bank ladder match on June 19, which he won. Later that same night, he would cash in his briefcase and quickly defeated Rollins (who had just defeated Reigns) to win the WWE World Heavyweight Championship for the first time. Ambrose made his first title defense against Rollins on the July 18 episode of Raw, where their match ended in a double pinfall. The following night at the 2016 WWE draft, Ambrose was drafted to SmackDown, being the brand's first draft pick and bringing the WWE Championship with him; that same night, he pinned Rollins to retain the championship. At Battleground, Ambrose retained his title against Reigns and Rollins after pinning Reigns. Ambrose then successfully defended the renamed "WWE World Championship" against Dolph Ziggler at SummerSlam in August. At Backlash on September 11, he lost the title to AJ Styles after Styles hit Ambrose with a low blow while the referee being incapacitated. Ambrose was unsuccessful in regaining the championship at No Mercy on October 9 in a triple threat match also involving John Cena, who was pinned by Styles. On November 20, Ambrose teamed with Styles as part of Team SmackDown at Survivor Series alongside Bray Wyatt, Randy Orton and Shane McMahon in a winning effort. He would face Styles in a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match at TLC for the WWE title. During the match, James Ellsworth interfered and pushed Ambrose off a ladder through multiple tables, allowing Styles to retain the title. Ambrose would then fail to become once again the number one contender for the reverted WWE Championship in a fatal four-way elimination match involving Dolph Ziggler, Luke Harper, and The Miz.

On the January 3, 2017 episode of SmackDown, Ambrose defeated The Miz to win the Intercontinental Championship for the second time. He participated in the 2017 Royal Rumble match in which he lasted almost 27 minutes before being eliminated by Brock Lesnar. On February 12, Ambrose took part in the WWE Championship Elimination Chamber match at the event of the same name, where he eliminated Baron Corbin with a roll-up pin only for Corbin to attack him afterward, allowing Miz to eliminate Ambrose. A match was set between Ambrose and Corbin at WrestleMania 33 on April 2, where Ambrose retained his Intercontinental Championship. Two nights later on SmackDown, Ambrose wrestled in his final match for the brand, in a losing effort to Corbin in a non-title match. Following that, Ambrose was moved to the Raw brand as a result of the Superstar Shake-up. He would then continue his feud with The Miz, who was also drafted to the aforementioned brand in the Superstar Shake-up, eventually losing the Intercontinental title to him at Extreme Rules in June, thus ending his reign at 152 days.Ambrose continued to feud with The Miz, leading up to a rematch for the Intercontinental Championship at Great Balls of Fire on July 9, where he lost after interference by the Miztourage (Curtis Axel and Bo Dallas). In August, Ambrose reconciled with former stablemate and rival Seth Rollins. Together, they defeated Cesaro and Sheamus at SummerSlam to win the Raw Tag Team Championship, making Ambrose both a Triple Crown and Grand Slam champion in the process. Ambrose and Rollins successfully defended the titles against the same duo at No Mercy in September, after Ambrose pinned Sheamus.


==== The Shield reunion (2017–2018) ====
On the October 9 episode of Raw, Ambrose and Rollins reunited with Roman Reigns. The newly reformed Shield was due to face the team of Braun Strowman, Cesaro, Kane, The Miz and Sheamus at TLC in a 5-on-3 handicap Tables, Ladders and Chairs match, but Reigns was replaced by Kurt Angle over an illness concern. Ambrose, Rollins, and Angle would go on to win the match. Ambrose and Rollins were scheduled to face SmackDown Tag Team Champions The Usos in an interbrand match at Survivor Series, but lost the tag titles back to Cesaro and Sheamus on the November 6 episode of Raw after a distraction from SmackDown's The New Day (Big E, Kofi Kingston, and Xavier Woods), thus ending their reign at 78 days. This led to a match between The Shield and The New Day at Survivor Series two weeks later, which the former won. In December 2017, Ambrose suffered a triceps injury, reportedly rendering him out of action for nine months.On the August 13, 2018 episode of Raw, Ambrose returned to assist Rollins against an attack from Drew McIntyre and Dolph Ziggler. Six days later, he assisted Rollins in winning the Intercontinental Championship at SummerSlam. The following night on Raw, Ambrose and Rollins aided Universal Champion Roman Reigns in attacking Braun Strowman when the latter attempted to cash-in his Money in the Bank contract, once again reuniting The Shield. At Hell in a Cell, Ambrose and Rollins were unsuccessful in defeating Ziggler and McIntyre for the Raw Tag Team Championship. In October, The Shield defeated Ziggler, McIntyre, and Strowman at the Super Show-Down event in Melbourne. Two nights later on Raw, they were defeated by the same trio in a rematch. After the match, a frustrated Ambrose walked away from his teammates.


==== Final storylines and departure (2018–2019) ====

On the October 22 episode of Raw, after Reigns announced his real-life leukemia and relinquished the Universal Championship, Ambrose and Rollins defeated Ziggler and McIntyre to capture the Raw Tag Team Championships for the second time in the main event. However, Ambrose immediately attacked Rollins after the match, turning heel (villain) for the first time since March 2014. Two weeks later on Raw, Ambrose attacked Rollins again, after the latter lost the tag titles in a handicap match against AOP (Akam and Rezar). The following week, Ambrose burned his Shield vest and explained that being part of the group had made him weak. He would continue to taunt Rollins over the following weeks by stalking him, getting vaccinated against what he perceived to be Rollins's "illness", and ordering his own personal SWAT team to attack Rollins, subsequently proclaiming himself as "The Moral Compass of WWE". Ambrose defeated Rollins at TLC, beginning his third Intercontinental Championship reign. Throughout the following weeks, he successfully defended his title against Tyler Breeze, Apollo Crews, and Rollins.Ambrose would lose the championship to Bobby Lashley on the January 14, 2019 episode of Raw, in a triple threat match also involving Rollins, ending his reign at 29 days. He entered the 2019 Royal Rumble match on January 27, but was eliminated by Aleister Black. The following night on Raw, he interrupted Royal Rumble winner Rollins and Triple H, proclaiming that Rollins never defeated him clean without interference and provoking Triple H into booking them in a match, which Ambrose subsequently lost. After the match, Ambrose attempted to address the crowd but was interrupted by Nia Jax and Tamina, with the former attacking Ambrose before he simply decided to leave rather than exact revenge. A few hours after Raw went off the air, it was reported that Ambrose had informed WWE officials that he would not be renewing his contract and would be leaving the company shortly after WrestleMania 35. WWE subsequently confirmed his decision in a statement. It was reported that he had been offered an improved contract by WWE, which he turned down due to long-standing frustration with the creative direction of his character and a particular dislike of the "hokey" material he had been given.After weeks of teasing a reunion, Ambrose reunited with Rollins and the recently returned Reigns on the March 4 episode of Raw, after they assisted Ambrose from an attack by Baron Corbin, Bobby Lashley, Drew McIntyre, and Elias the previous week, reverting Ambrose to a face again. At Fastlane on March 10, The Shield defeated the team of McIntyre, Lashley, and Corbin. The following night on Raw, Ambrose faced off against McIntyre in a falls count anywhere match, which he lost.On the April 8 episode of Raw, Ambrose was scheduled to face Lashley in what was billed as Ambrose's last match on Raw. However, the match never took place as Lashley insulted Ambrose's wife, Renee Young, resulting in a brawl and ending with Ambrose being slammed through the announce table. After Raw went off the air, Ambrose joined Rollins and Reigns to address the fans, thank them for their support, and comment on his past accomplishments before celebrating with his Shield teammates. The following week on Raw, he made another appearance after the show went off the air. His final contractual match occurred at a special event called The Shield's Final Chapter on April 21, where he, Reigns, and Rollins defeated the team of Corbin, Lashley, and McIntyre. His contract expired on April 30.On Chris Jericho's Talk is Jericho podcast in May 2019, Good recounted his departure from WWE, though he began by saying he was grateful for his time there, and cited achieving success. He decided to leave WWE after Vince McMahon made him give a promo on Raw where his character would get inoculated from various diseases out of fear of catching a virus from the fans. Good felt after this segment that his character was irreparably damaged. He left WWE citing the cause as mental and emotional exhaustion after six years of explaining to McMahon how his ideas for Good's character were "stupid". Due to McMahon's control over the company, Good had to follow McMahon's writing, which left him unhappy. Good came to dread promos, which were previously his favourite part of performing as a wrestler, to the point of feeling physically ill. His experience was corroborated by both Jericho and various anonymous WWE wrestlers and staff.


=== All Elite Wrestling (2019–present) ===
On May 1, Good posted a video on Twitter, promoting the return of his Jon Moxley gimmick. On May 25, Moxley made his unannounced debut for All Elite Wrestling (AEW) during their Double or Nothing event, attacking Chris Jericho, Kenny Omega, and the referee after Jericho and Omega's main event match. Shortly after, it was announced that Moxley had signed a multi-year contract. Moxley had his AEW debut match at the Fyter Fest pay-per-view in June, where he defeated Joey Janela in an unsanctioned match. After the match, Moxley was attacked by Omega in retaliation for his previous assault. A match between the two was scheduled for All Out on August 31. However, on August 23, Moxley was forced to pull out from the event after being diagnosed with a MRSA staph infection in his elbow, and would undergo surgery to remove it. AEW subsequently revealed Pac as Moxley's replacement at All Out. The match was subsequently rescheduled for the Full Gear event on November 9. Moxley made his return on October 2, during the inaugural episode of AEW Dynamite, attacking Omega during the latter's main event match. On the following episode of Dynamite, Moxley competed in his first sanctioned AEW match, defeating Shawn Spears. On November 9 at Full Gear, Moxley defeated Omega in an unsanctioned Lights Out match.


=== New Japan Pro-Wrestling (2019–present) ===
After weeks of New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW) airing videos of a mystery man targeting IWGP United States Champion Juice Robinson, Moxley was revealed as the culprit in May 2019, challenging Robinson for a title match at the final night of the Best of the Super Juniors 26 event on June 5. At the event, he defeated Robinson in his NJPW in-ring debut to win the IWGP United States Championship. Following Moxley's original challenge, AEW CEO Tony Khan stated that Moxley will be able to take independent and international bookings during the summer before AEW's television deal starts in the fall. However during an interview with Nikkan Sports, Good clarified that "[transl.] there is no problem in fighting in New Japan while belonging to AEW. In the future, I can always show up in Japan and have matches." According to Fightful, Good's contract will last until Wrestle Kingdom 14 in January 2020.At Dominion 6.9 in Osaka-jo Hall on June 9, Moxley defeated young lion Shota Umino, before declaring himself an entrant for the 2019 G1 Climax. In the aftermath of the match, he also publicly claimed his appreciation for Umino and stated that he was looking forward to partnering up with him; Umino subsequently became Moxley's manager and tag team partner. At the G1 Climax, Moxley, competing in the B block, won his first five matches against Taichi, Jeff Cobb, Tomohiro Ishii, Shingo Takagi and Tetsuya Naito. He suffered his first defeat in NJPW on July 14 when he and Umino were defeated by Cobb and Ren Narita in a tag match, after Cobb pinned Umino. Moxley would then suffer his first defeat in singles competition against Toru Yano, who defeated him via count-out on August 1 as a part of the tournament, before being pinned for the first time in NJPW by Jay White on August 4, also as a part of the tournament. He would then go on to also lose his final two matches in the tournament against Hirooki Goto and Robinson, failing to advance to the tournament finals with a final standing of 10 points.On October 13, Moxley was stripped of the United States Championship as he was unable to wrestle in a scheduled championship defense due to travel issues from Typhoon Hagibis. He was originally scheduled to defend his title in a No Disqualification match against Juice Robinson at King of Pro-Wrestling; he was replaced by Lance Archer, who defeated Robinson to win the vacant title.


=== Return to the independent circuit (2019–present) ===
Moxley made his debut for Northeast Wrestling (NEW) on June 14, defeating fellow AEW wrestler Darby Allin. The following night, he answered CazXL's open challenge, and would later defeat him in a match. Moxley would also make a surprise appearance at Future Stars of Wrestling (FSW)'s "Natural Born Killers" event on July 6, where he would wrestle Killer Kross to a no contest. He was also announced to face Josh Barnett at Game Changer Wrestling (GCW)'s Bloodsport 2 on September 14, however this match was later called off due to the same MRSA infection that forced Moxley to pull out of AEW's All Out show. On August 16, Moxley defeated Pentagón Jr. at NEW's "Prison Break".


== Professional wrestling style, persona, and reception ==

After debuting on WWE television with The Shield, Good, as Dean Ambrose, utilized a headlock driver, dubbed Dirty Deeds, as a finishing maneuver. Soon after The Shield's initial split in 2014, Ambrose began using a double underhook DDT as his Dirty Deeds finisher. Upon his departure from WWE, Good renamed his finisher the Death Rider and debuted a lifting variant of the move. Said lifting variant is dubbed the Paradigm Shift in AEW.Referred to as "The Lunatic Fringe" since his time in The Shield, Ambrose's WWE gimmick has seen him characterized as a mentally unstable and unpredictable wildcard. His gimmick has been compared to Heath Ledger's portrayal of The Joker. After becoming a villain in late 2018, Ambrose began proclaiming himself as "The Moral Compass of WWE." His revamped character invited comparisons to Tom Hardy's portrayal of Bane from the 2012 film The Dark Knight Rises.Ambrose's booking during his feuds with Seth Rollins and Bray Wyatt in 2014 was criticized by commentators, including James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch, who stated that although "he's a utility main eventer", his lack of victories indicated that he was not a guy that WWE was positioning "for a 2-3 year sustained run on top". Ambrose's post-Shield run as a heroic character gained significant popularity, with him being cheered over fellow heroic character Roman Reigns when they faced off in three world title matches (Payback and Survivor Series in 2015 and Fastlane in 2016). Ambrose was voted as the Most Popular Wrestler of the Year by Pro Wrestling Illustrated readers in 2014 and 2015.Moxley's match with Tomohiro Ishii during the G1 Climax in July 2019 was met with critical acclaim. Deadspin noted how the tournament offered an excellent platform for him to shine following his departure from WWE; they notably singled out his match against Ishii, calling it "almost certainly Moxley's best singles match ever, under any name, but it felt significant in another sense. It was good, brutal fun to watch, but it also pointed a way forward for Moxley not just as An Attraction  [sic], but rather as a brilliant and brilliantly violent wrestler." The match was also awarded five stars by Dave Meltzer of the Wrestling Observer Newsletter.


== Other media ==
Good, as Dean Ambrose, appears as a playable character in the video games WWE 2K14, WWE 2K15, WWE 2K16, WWE 2K17, WWE 2K18, and WWE 2K19.Under the Dean Ambrose name, Good made his acting debut in the 2015 action film 12 Rounds 3: Lockdown, in which he played detective John Shaw. In May 2019, it was reported by Deadline Hollywood that Good had been cast in Cagefighter, an "MMA-themed" action film. The film is currently shooting. As of November 2019, Good had reportedly finished filming his scenes.


=== Filmography ===


== Personal life ==
Good began dating WWE announcer Renee Paquette, better known as Renee Young, in 2013. They were married in April 2017. They reside in Las Vegas. In August 2018, Young became a commentator on WWE Raw on the night of Good's return from injury.Good moved to Birmingham, Alabama for a time in 2018 in order to be closer to doctors during his recovery from his torn bicep, after which he contracted a staph infection that nearly killed him.


== Championships and accomplishments ==

Combat Zone Wrestling
CZW World Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
Full Impact Pro
FIP World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Heartland Wrestling Association
HWA Heavyweight Championship (3 times)
HWA Tag Team Championship (5 times) – with Jimmy Turner (1), Ric Byrne (1), Cody Hawk (1) and King Vu (2)
Drake Younger Invitational Tournament (2009)
Mad-Pro Wrestling
MPW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
MPW Tag Team Championship (1 times) – with Dustin Rayz
Insanity Pro Wrestling
IPW World Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
IPW Mid-American Championship (1 time)
International Wrestling Association
IWA Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Hade Vansen
New Japan Pro-Wrestling
IWGP United States Championship (1 time)
Pro Wrestling Illustrated
Feud of the Year (2014) vs. Seth Rollins
Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (2014, 2015)
Ranked No. 8 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2017
Westside Xtreme Wrestling
wXw World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Sami Callihan
wXw World Tag Team Title Tournament (2009) with Sami Callihan
WWE
WWE Championship (1 time)
WWE Intercontinental Championship (3 times)
WWE Raw Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Seth Rollins
WWE United States Championship (1 time)
Twenty-seventh Triple Crown Champion
Eighth Grand Slam Champion (under current format; sixteenth overall)
Money in the Bank (2016)
Slammy Award (5 times)Breakout Star of the Year (2013, 2014) – 2013 award shared with The Shield
Faction of the Year (2013, 2014) – with The Shield
Trending Now (Hashtag) of the Year (2013) – #BelieveInTheShield, with The Shield
WWE Year-End Award (2 times)
Best Reunion (2018) – as part of The Shield
Return of the Year (2018)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Dean Ambrose on WWE.com
Jon Moxley's New Japan Pro-Wrestling profile
Jonathan Good on IMDb 
Jon Moxley's profile at Cagematch.net, Wrestlingdata.com, Internet Wrestling Database
HWA profile at the Wayback Machine (archived February 22, 2012)
IPW profile at the Wayback Machine (archived April 4, 2010)