Stevens–Henager College

Stevens–Henager College is a private non-profit college with its main campus in Ogden, Utah. The college is one of four educational institutions affiliated with the Salt Lake City-based Center for Excellence in Higher Education (CEHE). Established in 1891, the college has five campuses in Idaho and Utah. It offers online and on-campus programs for associate's degrees, bachelor's degrees, and master's degrees.  Although it is accredited by the Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges, Stevens–Henager College and all other institutions owned by the Center for Excellence in Higher Education were placed on probation in September of 2018 because "the inputs, resources, and processes of CEHE schools are designed and implemented in a manner that is not designed for student success."


== History ==
Stevens–Henager, one of the oldest colleges in Utah, was opened in September 1891 by Professor James Ayers Smith, an educator from Nebraska, as the Inter-Mountain Business College, with an enrollment of seven pupils.  It began teaching commercial subjects and placed graduates in business positions. Paul Kenneth Smith, son of James Ayers Smith, began as the typewriter machinist and later served as an instructor at the college.
For about 19 years, Stevens–Henager College was known as Intermountain Business College. A Biennial Catalogue for enrollment 1908-09 shows the school's name as The Smithsonian Business College and Shorthand School, 258 Twenty Fourth Street, Ogden, Utah.
In 1910, Professor J. A. Smith retired and sold the school to C. S. Springer, who changed the name to the Smithsonian Business School. In 1938, the college was purchased by Dr. David B. Moench, son of Louis F. Moench, a Utah educator and the first principal of Weber Stake Academy, which later became Weber State College. It then became known as the Moench University of Business and operated as such until 1940, when it was purchased by I. W. Stevens and renamed Ogden Business College. The name was changed to Stevens–Henager College in 1959.Stevens-Henager has its main campus in Ogden, Utah. In 1978, the college established a campus in Provo. Other campuses followed including Salt Lake City Campus in Utah in 1999, Logan Campus in Utah in 2001, and Boise Campus in 2004 in Idaho.


=== Non-profit status ===
In 2012, the college announced its intent to transfer to non-profit status for Title IV financial aid purposes (not to be confused with their non-profit Internal Revenue Service status) through its affiliation with the CEHE.As of July 2018, the US Department of Education online database still lists the Stevens Henager College campuses and Independence University as Not for Profit.


== Campuses ==
Stevens–Henager College has an online college (Independence University) and six campuses across Utah and Idaho. Campuses are in:
Independence University Salt Lake City, Utah (8,605 online students)
Murray, Utah (651 students)
Orem, Utah  (143 students)
Logan, Utah (72 students)
Idaho Falls, Idaho (111 students)
Boise, Idaho (259 students)
St. George, Utah (111 students)


== Accreditation ==
Stevens-Henager is an accredited member of Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges (ACCSC). College degree programs are accredited by national accrediting bodies recognized by the U.S. Department of Education providing accreditation to non-university postsecondary colleges. Stevens-Henager's Medical Specialties Program is accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs (CAAHEP) upon Curriculum Review Board of the American Association of Medical Assistants Endowment (CRB-AAMAE) recommendation. Accreditation Review Committee on Education in Surgical Technology (ARC-ST) and Committee on Accreditation for Respiratory Care (CoARC) have recommended the accreditation of Surgical Technology Program and Respiratory Therapy Program, currently offered by the College.Stevens-Henager is not regionally accredited.


== See also ==
For-profit higher education in the United States


== References ==


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Official website