Cabra, Dublin

Cabra (Irish: An Chabrach, meaning "the poor land") is an inner suburb on the northside of Dublin city in Ireland. It is approximately 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) northwest of the city centre, in the administrative area of Dublin City Council. It was commonly known as Cabragh until the early 20th century.  Largely located between the Royal Canal and the Phoenix Park, it is primarily a residential suburb, with a range of institutions and some light industry. Cabra is served by bus, tram and mainline rail; it lies across Navan Road, one of the main roads from central Dublin to the orbital motorway.


== History ==
From about 1480, the manor of Cabra was held by a branch of the Plunket family, another branch of which was later ennobled as Earls of Fingall.  The branch which held Cabragh had their main residence at Dunsoghly Castle near Finglas.
There are three contiguous townlands called "Cabra", each in a different civil parish: Grangegorman, Glasnevin and Castleknock. The three met at the gate lodge of Cabragh House, today the location of the roundabout at the meeting of Ratoath Road and Fassaugh Avenue and the Canon Burke Senior Citizens Flats complex. Completed in 1598, Cabragh House was first occupied by the Segrave family. The mansion was then the home of the "hanging judge" Lord Norbury, until he died in 1831 and the Segrave family managed to reacquire it. Charles Segrave, whose son was the famous racing driver Henry Segrave lived there until 1912. The big house was bought by Dublin Corporation by way of a compulsory purchase order in 1939 for the construction of local authority housing, and the historic house was razed to the ground.
The Industrial Revolution brought the construction of the Royal Canal in 1790 and the laying of one railway line (a Great Southern and Western branch), both through the northern part of the area, while another railway line (the Great Western from Broadstone Terminus) ran through the heart of the area. The Great Southern and Western branch line even had a side line for the North City Mills on the border of Cabra and Phibsboro.  Due to the proximity of Broadstone, there were no local railway stations, the nearest being beyond Phibsboro, Glasnevin Station northeast of Cross Guns (then Westmoreland) Bridge.
From about 1880 to 1930, Cabra was a prominent market garden centre and a giant lairage, where cattle being brought to market at Hanlon's Corner were kept in pens and grazing fields; there was a set of cattle sidings on the GW&W Railway line to the east of Carnlough Road. Until the 1920s, when large scale housing developments took place, the area mostly comprised fields and open countryside on the edge of the city. Many of the people who moved to the new suburb were from the city centre slums.
Quarry Road was originally called Quarry Lane, after a small quarry which was situated near where the current statue of Our Blessed Lady is located at the roundabout with Fassaugh Road (originally Fassaugh Lane.) This quarry was filled in the early part of the 1900s and the family who lived in the Homestead grew cabbages on the reclaimed land.


== Geography ==
Cabra is located southwest of the Royal Canal, except for one small piece of land between canal and railway line, and northeast of the Phoenix Park, and runs southeast to northwest, from Phibsboro at Doyle's Corner and around the sixth Royal Canal lock, and Grangegorman at Hanlon's Corner, to Ashtown and Pelletstown; across the canal are the districts of first Glasnevin and then Finglas.  The area is often divided into Cabra East and Cabra West, but these are not well-defined.
The Bradogue River, a tributary of the Liffey, rises underground at the southern edge of the district.


== Transport and access ==


=== Dublin Bus ===
Dublin Bus' two main routes for the area are the 120 Ashtown via Cabra West/East to Parnell Street/Ballsbridge and 122 Ashington, Cabra West/East, City to Drimnagh. Routes 38/a/b and Nitelink 39N serve Cabra Road, while 37, 39, 39a,70, 70N serve Navan Road. Route 46A travels the North Circular Road, part of Cabra's southern boundary.


== LUAS ==

The Luas Green Line, part of Dublin's tram system, has been extended to a terminus at Broombridge railway station, with another local LUAS stop deep in the area, Cabra, and also nearby Phibsborough, Grangegorman and Broadstone-DIT – the last two serving the new TU Dublin (formerly Dublin Institute of Technology) campus at Grangegorman.


=== Mainline rail ===
Suburban rail stops at Broombridge railway station, en route to Maynooth railway station,  M3 Parkway railway station or station in Dublin city centre such as Docklands railway station or Dublin Connolly railway station.


== Features ==


=== Broom Bridge ===

Broom Bridge, also known as Brougham Bridge, is a small bridge along Broombridge Road which crosses the Royal Canal in Cabra. The bridge is named after William Broom, one of the directors of the Royal Canal Company. Broom Bridge is the location where Sir William Rowan Hamilton, following a 'eureka experience', first wrote down the fundamental formula for quaternions on 16 October 1843, which is to this day commemorated by a stone plaque on the northwest corner of the underside of the bridge. The text on the plaque reads:

Here as he walked by on the 16th of October 1843 Sir William Rowan Hamilton in a flash of genius discovered the fundamental formula for quaternion multiplication i² = j² = k² = ijk = −1 and cut it on a stone of this bridge.

Given the historical importance of the mathematical contribution, mathematicians have been known to make a pilgrimage of sorts to the site.


=== Other buildings ===
Dublin city's public libraries have one of their administrative centres in the area, attached to Cabra Library – this Bibliographic Centre processes all books received and dispatches them to all branch libraries.  
Deaf Village Ireland, formerly the School and Home for the Deaf, is located in a parkland setting in southern Cabra West.  This facility is home to a range of Deaf organisations, including Deaf Sports Ireland.
Along the canal towards Liffey Junction, and serving the railway, was once a coke-making site, of which only some of the Coke Oven Cottages, formerly lying north and south of the canal, remain.  Near the Sixth Lock was a pin mill on the site now occupied by 25–36 Shandon Mill (closer to the Fifth Lock and Cross Guns Bridge was a corn mill, at another time Mallet's Ironworks).


== Education ==
Cabra contains several primary schools, as well as some second-level institutions.  One primary school, Christ the King GNS, is unique insofar as it was built close to the edge of the adjoining road, and encloses a sheltered playground; it and its associated hall were designed by Robinson and Keefe Architects.  Another is the North Dublin Muslim School.
St. Declan's College is a secondary school located in Cabra West, originally set up by The Christian Brothers. It is a public school under Christian management opened in 1960.  Also in the area were St. Joseph's School for Deaf Boys and St. Mary's School for Deaf Girls, which merged to form the Holy Family School for the Deaf, as well as Casa Caterina, for children suffering from ADD, Asperger's syndrome and similar conditions.
Cabra Technical School was also designed by Robinson and Keefe Architects.


== Commerce ==
Cabra West has many factories in the industrial park and also along Bannow Road, one of the most famous of these being the Batchelors beans factory.


== Religion ==
Cabra is a parish in the Fingal South West deanery of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Dublin.
The Roman Catholic Church of Christ the King was opened in 1933 in the wake of the Eucharistic Congress of Dublin (1932). John J. Robinson of Robinson and Keefe was asked to design the new church, as he had been architect for all the structures (Phoenix Park, Merrion Road, O'Connell bridge etc.) built for the Congress. The church is cross shaped in plan and was built in red brick with a huge statue of Christ integrated into the tower, which is on the axis of the approach road. There is an architect's perspective drawing of the church in the Irish Architectural Archive in Merrion Square. The church shares many features with St. Therese Mount Merrion which was built by the same architect some 20 years later. Robinson is also famed as being architect of Galway Cathedral.


== Local organisations ==
The Order of Malta Ambulance Corps has a branch in the area, and has provided training in first-aid and nursing skills, and voluntary community care services for over 30 years. The related national youth organisation, the Order of Malta Cadets, is for 10- to 16-year-olds.The FÁS training centre, present in Cabra since 1978, was closed down on 24 December 2010. Courses, staff and instructors were sent to other training centres on the city. One of the apprenticeship courses, Construction Plant Fitting, has since been moved to a temporary home in Baldoyle, near the FÁS Baldoyle Training Centre.


== Notable persons ==
Famous people from Cabra include singer-songwriter Eleanor McEvoy, world champion boxer Steve Collins, author and journalist Gene Kerrigan, actors Michael Gambon and Frank Grimes, actress and singer Angeline Ball, singer Dickie Rock and multi-time WWE world champion Sheamus (real name Stephen Farrelly).
Numerous footballers hail from Cabra, including Republic of Ireland international goalkeeper Wayne Henderson, and Eamonn Fagan and Liam Whelan, both from St. Attracta Road.  Whelan was one of the Manchester United Busby Babes who died in the Munich air disaster of 1958, and Connaught Bridge was later renamed in his memory.  The former Leeds United and Irish player and manager Johnny Giles also hails from the area. Roddy Collins, former manager of Bohemians, Shamrock Rovers and Maltese side Floriana, lived in Cabra before being appointed manager of Cork City.
The suburb's most infamous former resident was John Toler, 1st Earl of Norbury, otherwise known as the hanging judge, who lived at Cabragh House on the corner of the present day Fassaugh Avenue and Ratoath Road. 
One of the world's most famous mathematicians, William Rowan Hamilton, who freed algebra from the commutative postulate of multiplication (that the order or sequence of factors does not determine the result) was associated with the area. There is a plaque in his honour at the Broom Bridge.


== References ==


== External links ==
Cabra history