Goldsmith Book Prize

The Goldsmith Book Prize is a literary award for books published in the United States.


== Description ==
The award is meant to recognize works that "[improve] government through an examination of the intersection between press, politics, and public policy." The prize is awarded to the book published in the previous year that best exemplifies the fulfillment of this goal. The first such prize was awarded in 1993. The program was expanded in 2002 to include two separate book prizes, for trade and academic works.The Goldsmith Awards Program, launched in 1991, is based at the Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, a part of Harvard University. The center also gives out the Goldsmith Prize for Investigative Reporting, and the Goldsmith Career Award for Excellence in Journalism.


== Book Prize winners ==
2017 Academic: James T. Hamilton, Democracy’s Detectives: The Economics of Investigative Journalism
Trade: David Greenberg, Republic of Spin: An Inside History of the American Presidency2016 Academic: Erik Albæk, Arjen van Dalen, Nael Jebril and Claes H. de Vreese, Political Journalism in Comparative Perspective
Trade: Harold Holzer, Lincoln and the Power of the Press: The War for Public Opinion2015 Academic: Daniela Stockmann, Media Commercialization and Authoritarian Rule in China
Trade: Andrew Pettegree, The Invention of News: How the World Came to Know about Itself2014Academic: Kevin Arceneaux and Martin Johnson, Changing Minds or Changing Channels? Partisan News in an Age of Choice
Matthew Levendusky, How Partisan Media Polarize America
Trade: Jaron Lanier, Who Owns the Future?2013Academic: Jonathan M. Ladd, Why Americans Hate the Media and How It Matters
Trade: Rebecca MacKinnon, Consent of the Networked: The Worldwide Struggle for Internet Freedom2012Academic: Jeffrey E. Cohen, Going Local: Presidential Leadership in the Post-Broadcast Age [1]
Trade: Evgeny Morozov, The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom2011Academic: Tim Groeling, When Politicians Attack: Party Cohesion in the Media
Patrick J. Sellers, Cycles of Spin: Strategic Communication in the U.S. Congress
Trade: Jack Fuller, What Is Happening to the News: The Information Explosion and the Crisis in Journalism2010Academic: Matthew Hindman, The Myth of Digital Democracy
Trade: John Maxwell Hamilton, Journalism's Roving Eye: A History of American Foreign Reporting2009Academic: Markus Prior, Post-Broadcast Democracy: How Media Choice Increases Inequality in Political Involvement and Polarizes Elections.
Trade: Jane Mayer, The Dark Side: The Inside Story of How the War on Terror Turned into a War on American Ideals2008Academic: John G. Geer, In Defense of Negativity: Attack Ads in Presidential Campaigns
Trade: Ted Gup, Nation of Secrets: The Threat to Democracy and the American Way of Life2007Academic: Diana C. Mutz, Hearing the Other Side: Deliberative versus Participatory Democracy
Trade: Gene Roberts and Hank Klibanoff, The Race Beat: The Press, the Civil Rights Struggle and the Awakening of a Nation2006Academic: James A. Stimson, Tides of Consent: How Public Opinion Shapes American Politics
Trade: Geoffrey R. Stone, Perilous Times: Free Speech in Wartime from the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism2005Academic: Daniel C. Hallin and Paolo Mancini, Comparing Media Systems: Three Models of Media and Politics
Trade: Paul Starr, The Creation of the Media: Political Origins of Modern Communications2004Academic: Scott L. Althaus, Collective Preferences in Democratic Politics: Opinion Surveys and the Will of the People
Paul M. Kellstedt, The Mass Media and the Dynamics of American Racial Attitudes
Trade: Bill Katovsky and Timothy Carlson, Embedded: The Media at War in Iraq [2]2003Academic: Doris Graber, Processing Politics: Learning from Television in the Internet Age
Trade: Leonard Downie, Jr. and Robert G. Kaiser, The News About the News: American Journalism in Peril [3]2002Academic: Robert M. Entman and Andrew Rojecki, The Black Image in the White Mind [4]
Trade: Bill Kovach and Tom Rosenstiel, The Elements of Journalism [5]2001Lawrence R. Jacobs & Robert Y. Shapiro, Politicians Don't Pander: Political Manipulation and the Loss of Democratic Responsiveness2000Robert McChesney, Rich Media, Poor Democracy [6]1999James Hamilton, Channeling Violence: The Economic Market for Violent Television Programming1998Richard Norton Smith, The Colonel: The Life and Legend of Robert R. McCormick, 1880-19551997No award given1996Stephen Ansolabehere and Shanto Iyengar, Going Negative: How Political Advertisements Shrink and Polarize the Electorate1995William Hoynes, Public Television for Sale: Media, the Market and the Public Sphere1994Cass R. Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech1993Greg Mitchell, Campaign of the Century: Upton Sinclair's Race for Governor of California and the Birth of Media Politics


== See also ==
List of American literary awards
List of literary awards


== References ==


== External links ==
Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy's official Web site