Aline Villares Reis

Aline Villares Reis (born 15 April 1989) is a Brazilian professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for Spanish club UD Granadilla Tenerife and the Brazil women's national team. Aline grew up in Campinas, Brazil. At the age of 18, she moved to Orlando, FL to play college soccer. Aline has been a standout player for every team she has been a part of. She is known for her athleticism, speed & agility, leaping ability and high technical level, being considered the Jorge Campos of women's soccer.


== College career ==
Aline was a four-year starter at the University of Central Florida and earned NSCAA All-Central Region and All-Conference-USA honors all four seasons. She started all but two matches for UCF and totaled 2,278 minutes during her college career. In her first year (2008), she received NSCAA All-America honors, becoming one of just three freshmen in the country to be named to the first or second teams and the first UCF player in 13 years to earn All-America acclaim, following the footsteps of Player of the Century, Michelle Akers. She went on to finish her career ranked second in school history for career saves (347), fourth for shutouts (28) and sixth for goals-against average (1.04) and was named UCF's No. 1 player in the C-USA era.Amanda Cromwell was UCF's Head Coach during Aline's college career stated that she "is every coach's dream player and every player's dream teammate."College Awards:

NSCAA All-America (2008)
4x Conference USA Champion (2008–2011)
2x NSCAA Scholar All-America Team (2010 & 2011)
4x All-Region Team (2008–2011)
4x All-Conference USA Team (2008–2011)
Record Holder for C-USA Player of the Week Award
Lowe’s Senior Award First Team (2011)
UCF Scholar-Athlete Award (2011)
Voted Team Most Valuable Player all four seasonsSenior Year Highlight Video


== Club career ==
Following her collegiate playing career, Aline played professionally in Finland with first division side Seinäjoen Mimmiliiga, and worked as the Director of Soccer Operations for her alma mater, UCF, while pursuing a master's degree in sport and exercise science. In late 2013, Aline joined the UCLA Bruins Women's Soccer Coaching Staff as a Goalkeeper Coach. She left UCLA in the beginning of 2016 to play for Ferroviária in her native country. Besides Ferroviária, Aline played for Guarani FC for over six years.


== International career ==
Aline was first called to the Full Brazilian National Team Camp in July, 2009 during her college career. Even though her official national team debut didn't happen until later, during her national team career Aline was a part of several training camps and friendly matches with Brazil. In 2016, following a distinguished Spring Season with Ferroviária, Reis earned a spot on the National Team Roster again and a contract to be in residency with the Full Brazilian National Team (Seleção Permanente) that was preparing for the 2016 Olympic Games happening in Rio. The roster carried three other goalkeepers besides Aline but after the residential period of training and preparation for the Olympics, Aline earned one of the two goalkeepers spots on the final 18-players Olympic Roster. Reis beat out 2015 World Cup starter, for the back up spot in goal. Aline made her national team debut during the 2016 Summer Olympics in Brazil, playing all 90 minutes against South Africa, in front of 42,000 people at the Arena da Amazônia in Manaus.. The match ended in a 0–0 draw.


== References ==


== External links ==
In Focus: Aline Reis
2016 Olympics player profile
UCF Player Profile
UCLA Profile
Aline Reis Futbol