A Christmas to Remember (2016 film)

A Christmas to Remember is a Christmas film originally broadcast on the Hallmark Movies & Mysteries network on December 18, 2016.It is not a remake of the 1978 film of the same name.
The film received mixed reviews.


== Plot ==
Jennifer Wade is the host of Homestyle, a successful cooking show broadcast in New York City. Desperate for a break (and missing the "simpler Christmas" of her past), Jennifer takes a spur of the moment vacation at a mountain chalet in Colorado. However, on her way to the chalet she gets lost and swerves off the road. Dazed and confused, she stumbles into the road, where she is nearly hit by John Blake, a struggling veterinarian from nearby North Creek and a widower with three children who is still grieving over the loss of his wife.
The accident leaves Jennifer with retrograde amnesia, unable to remember anything about her past. John and his family take her in, while Jennifer (now going by the name Maggie) recovers and John attempts to locate anyone who may know her. While recovering, John and Maggie begin to develop feelings for each other and she finds the simpler Christmas she once knew.
Ultimately someone recognizes Maggie as Jennifer, and contacts Paula, Jennifer's friend at the network. Paula and Brad, Jennifer's boyfriend, come to North Creek to take her home.  But back in New York City, Jennifer realizes that she's unhappy in the big city and misses John; she leaves Brad and her show behind to return to North Creek. On Christmas Day John and his family open presents and find a gingerbread house in the form of John's animal hospital from Jennifer. He tells the family that they are going to bring Maggie back and as they open the door Jennifer is standing there.
In the final scene, one year later, the now married Jennifer Blake hosts her Homestyle show on a set in North Creek, surrounded by her new family.


== Cast ==
Mira Sorvino as Jennifer Wade, a successful television personality
Cameron Mathison as John Blake, a veterinarian in North Creek and a widower with three kids
Jesse Filkow as Kyle Blake, John's son
Bailey Skodje as Daisy Blake, John's younger daughter
Elle McKinnon as Jamie Blake, John's elder daughter
Brenda Crichlow as Paula, Jennifer's editor at the network and her friend
Steve Bacic as Brad, Jennifer's boyfriend in New York
Kevin McNulty as Dan
Wendy Abbott as Bunny, John's mother-in-law
John Innes as Emmett, John's father-in-law
Ona Grauer as Brooke, a friend of John's who has had a crush on him
Tanya Champoux as Holly
Brad Dryborough as Stan
Eric Keenleyside as Sheriff Tim Edwards
Patricia Drake as Dr. Sylvia Edwards
Conor Gomez as Deputy Darren Wilkes
Gidget as  Biscuit the dog


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
A Christmas to Remember on IMDb