Gomorrah (TV series)

Gomorrah (Italian: Gomorra - La serie) is an Italian crime drama television series created and produced by Roberto Saviano, based on Saviano's book of the same name. It originally aired on the Sky Italia network on 6 May 2014, and has run for four seasons. It premiered in the United Kingdom on Sky Atlantic on 4 August 2014, and in the United States on SundanceTV on 24 August 2016. The series has also been sold in 170 countries worldwide.It tells the story of Ciro Di Marzio (Marco D'Amore), a member of the Savastano clan, headed by Pietro Savastano (Fortunato Cerlino), a high-ranking member. Ciro aims to navigate the dangers of the criminal world, while also fighting a brutal civil war. The title is a play on the Neapolitan crime syndicate Camorra, and the show is set and filmed in Naples. The Savastano family also consists of his wife Immacolata (Maria Pia Calzone) and son, Gennaro (Salvatore Esposito). The show also features rival crime boss Salvatore Conte (Marco Palvetti), while introducing the characters Annalisa Magliocca (Cristina Donadio), Patrizia Santore (Cristiana Dell'Anna) Giuseppe Avitabile (Gianfranco Gallo) in the show's later seasons.
Upon release, Gomorrah has gained critical acclaim for its characterization, pacing, atmosphere, acting, directing, and writing. It has also become a ratings hit for Sky, regularly featuring as one of the network's most-watched cable shows.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main characters ===
Marco D'Amore as Ciro Di Marzio (season 1–3) – a member of the Savastano clan who yearns to rise in criminal hierarchy.
Salvatore Esposito (season 1–) as Gennaro "Genny" Savastano – Pietro's son, who transitions from a spoiled socialite to hardened criminal.
Fortunato Cerlino as Pietro Savastano (season 1–2) – the head of the Savastano clan and a high-level drug distributor.
Maria Pia Calzone as Immacolata "Imma" Savastano (season 1) – Pietro's wife, who seeks to succeed her husband.
Marco Palvetti as Salvatore Conte (season 1–2) – the leader of the Conte clan, who maintains a troubled relationship with the Savastanos.
Fabio De Caro as Malammore (season 1–3) – a member of the Savastano clan deeply loyal to Pietro and uncle to Patrizia Santore
Cristina Donadio as Annalisa "Scianel" Magliocca (season 2–3) – a local drug dealer who aspires to become a female don.
Cristiana Dell'Anna as Patrizia Santore (season 2–4) – niece of Malammore and associate of the Savastano clan and, later, sole boss of the Secondigliano territory.
Gianfranco Gallo as Giuseppe Avitabile (season 2–3) – a rival clan leader based in Rome and father of Azzurra.
Ivana Lotito as Azzurra Avitabile (season 2–) – wife of Gennaro Savastano.
Arturo Muselli as Enzo "Sangueblù" (Blue Blood) Villa (season 3–) – leader of the Santo clan in Forcella.
Andrea Di Maria as Elia "'o Diplomato" (The Graduate) Capaccio (season 3) – co-leader of the Capaccio clan.
Carlo Caracciolo as Fernando "'o Crezi" (Crazy) Capaccio (season 3–4) – co-leader of the Capaccio clan.
Loris De Luna as Valerio "o Vucabulà" Misano (season 3–4) – Enzo's right-hand man and influential member of the Santo clan.
Gianni Parisi as Gerlando Levante (season 4) – Boss of a powerful clan in the province of Caserta, he is Genny's uncle on his mother's side.
Luciano Giugliano as Michelangelo "Mickey" Levante (season 4) – Gerlando's favorite son, unlike his brothers, he was able to study and get a degree. He marries Patrizia after getting her pregnant, against his father's approval.


=== Recurring characters ===
Antonio Milo as Attilio Diotallevi (season 1) – one of the "Old" affiliates of the Savastano family, a close friend of Ciro, who regards him as a father.
Simona Capozzi as Antonietta Diotallevi (season 1) – the wife of Attilio Diotallevi.
Massimiliano Rossi as Zecchinetta (season 1) – one of the "Old" members of the Savastano clan. Brother of Scianel and uncle of Lelluccio, he manages the important market place of the Celestial Houses.
Mimmo Esposito as Renato Bolletta (season 1) – one of the "Old" members affiliated with the Savastano family, the manager of the Piazza dei Smurci outlet.
Walter Lippa as Carlucciello 'o Pisciavinnolo (season 1) – one of the "Old" Savastano clan members.
Ivan Boragine as Michele Casillo (seasons 1–) – one of Genny Savastano's best friends and candidate for mayor.
Gaetano Di Vaio as 'o Baroncino (season 1) – one of the "Old" loyalists of Savastano.
Alfonso Postiglione as Vitale 'o Fringuello (season 1) – one of the "Old" members of the Savastano gang and brother of 'o Zingaro
Giovanni Allocca as Vitale 'o Zingaro (season 1) – one of the "Old" Savastano associates and brother of 'o Fringuello
Claudio Corinaldesi as Aniello l'Africano (season 1) – a member of the Savastano clan.
Emilio Vacca as Alfredo 'a Lisca (season 1) – a member of the Savastano family.
Carlo Guitto as Lino Centocapelli (season 1) – a member of the Savastano family.
Carmine Battaglia as Pino (season 1) – one of the "Young" members of the Savastano clan.
Emanuele Vicorito as 'o Pop (season 1) – one of the "Young" affiliates of the Savastano gang.
Alessio Gallo as Tonino Spiderman (season 1) – one of the "Young" affiliates of Savastano, grandson of Carlucciello 'o Pisciavinolo
Vincenzo Sacchettino as Daniele "Danielino" (season 1) – a very young mechanic, fascinated by the world of the Camorra, easily manipulated by Ciro Di Marzio
Domenico Balsamo as Massimo (season 1) – brother of Danielino and personal driver of Salvatore Conte.
Antonio Zavatteri as Franco Musi (season 1) – accountant of the Savastanos and husband to Gaia.
Annamaria Malipiero as Gaia Musi (season 1). – wife of accountant Franco Musi and mother of Perla
Matilde Gioli as Perla (season 1) – daughter of Gaia, wife of accountant Franco Musi, to whom he is very close, loved as if she were his natural daughter.
Rinat Khismatouline as Eremenko (season 1) – leader of the Russian mafia that operates in Barcelona.
Michelangelo Dalisi as Salvo Nunziata (season 1) – an informant of Pietro Savastano, instructed by the latter to find information on the member of the clan guilty of having carried out the tip on the cocaine cargo coming from Honduras.
Rosario D'Angelo as Augusto Parisi (season 1) – the Capacamorra of Casavatore.
David Power as Pasqualino (season 1) – a young drug addict who has been detained at the Poggioreale prison due to a robbery at a Mergellina jewelry store. Entering the prison under the protection of Pietro Savastano, immediately after his arrest.
Francesco Murolo as Antonio (season 1) – an old friend of Pietro Savastano, detained at the Poggioreale prison.
Tommaso Palladino as Rino (season 1) – a penitentiary policeman on duty at the prison of Poggioreale, a loyal follower of Pietro Savastano, who helps him, during his detention, to find a cell phone clandestinely.
Sidy Diop as Tokumbo (season 1) – a member of the gang of Nigerians who pass off the drugs bought by Savastano intentionally imprisoned in Poggioreale to speak directly with Pietro Savastano to retract their agreement and profits.
Lello Serao as Prison Commander (season 1) – commander of the guards of the Poggioreale penitentiary. During Pietro Savastano's stay in prison he will try to oppose his communications with the outside by subjecting him to the same treatment as the other prisoners.
Susy Di Benedetto as Marta Giacobone (season 1) – a young lesbian girl who, after the suicide of her father is in debt with an usurer, Leccalecca
Nuccio Siano as Franco Leccalecca (season 1) – an usurer
Luisa Esposito as Marina (season 1) – Donna Imma's assistant and driver
Elena Margaret Starace as Noemi (season 1) – the first girlfriend of Genny Savastano.
Antonella Carillo as Jessica Chianese (season 1) – the second girlfriend of Genny Savastano and daughter of Demetrio Chianese, a well-known doctor from Giugliano in Campania.
Oscar di Maio as Fabretti (season 1) – defeated in the local elections by Michele Casillo, the young candidate for mayor supported by Genny Savastano.
Pietro Juliano as Antonino "Tonino" Russo (season 1) –  a prominent exponent of the Conte clan.
Antonio Orefice as Bruno (season 1) – a young friend of Danielino.
Denise Perna as Manu (season 1) – the young girlfriend of Danielino, inspired by Gelsomina Verde.
Carlo Musella as Pablo (season 1–2) – the bodyguard of Salvatore Conte in Barcelona.
Carmine Monaco as 'o Track (season 1–2) – entered the world of the Camorra as one of the new pupils of Genny Savastano.
Lino Musella as Rosario Ercolano "'o Nano" (dwarf) (seasons 1–2) – the best friend and right-hand man of Ciro Di Marzio.
Pina Turco as Deborah Di Marzio (seasons 1–2) – the wife of Ciro and mother of Maria Rita.
Claudia Veneziano as Maria Rita Di Marzio (seasons 1–2) – the daughter of Ciro and Deborah Di Marzio.
Vincenzo Fabricino as Lorenzo 'o Pitbull (seasons 1–2) – a member of the Savastano family, a friend of Ciro Di Marzio.
Giovanni Buselli as Capa 'e Bomba (seasons 1–3) – one of the "Young" members of the Savastano gang.
Christian Giroso as Carmeniello 'o Cardillo (seasons 1–3) – one of the "Young" members of Savastano.
Gianluca Di Gennaro as 'o Zingariello (season 2) – son of 'o Zingaro and nephew of 'o Fringuello, "Old" members of the Savastano clan.
Alessandra Langella as Nina (season 2) – a transsexual girl who works as a singer at ceremonies.
Antonio Folletto as Gabriele Said 'o Principe (Prince) (season 2) – lieutenant of Salvatore Conte and very skilled at cutting cocaine. After the death of Conte, he joined Ciro's Alliance.
Liana Balogun as Azmera (season 2) – a black girl, girlfriend of 'o Principe.
Luca Gallone as Totò called 'o Mulatto (season 2) – a lieutenant of Salvatore Conte, then Ciro.
Michele Rosiello as Mario Cantapane (season 2) – Scianel's personal driver.
Vincenzo Nemolato as Angelo Sepino (season 2) – a young criminal who becomes the protagonist of a robbery against the Alliance.
Arturo Sepe as Angioletto (season 2) – a soldier of Pietro Savastano.
Vincenzo Pirozzi as Raffaele Magliocca known as Lelluccio (season 2) – the son of Scianel, Marinella's husband.
Nello Mascia as Don Aniello Pastore (season 2–) – an old boss of a Camorra branch operating in the central area of Naples and allied to Giuseppe Avitabile.
Luigi Pisani as Tommaso Natale (season 2–3) – the right-hand man of Giuseppe Avitabile.
Gianni Spezzano as Fernando (season 2–) – a soldier of Ciro, often also acting as his bodyguard along with 'o Pitbull.
Francesco Verde as Domenico (season 2–3) – Scianel's bodyguard.
Luca Varone as Sergio (season 2–3) – a soldier under the command of Pietro Savastano after his escape.
Giovanni Rienzo as 'o Foal (season 2–3) – a soldier under the command of Pietro Savastano after his escape, often accompanying Malammore.
Pasquale Russo as 'a Zeppola (season 2–) – one of Pietro Savastano's soldiers after his escape.
Denise Capezza as Marinella (season 2–3) – the wife of Scianel's son, Lelluccio Magliocca.
Antonio Ciccone as 'a Lince (season 2–3) – a soldier under the command of Pietro Savastano after his escape.
Alfredo Herrera as Joaquin Rollero (season 2–3) – one of the Honduran traffickers who becomes a trusted friend of Genny.
Gaetano Amato as 'o Ghepardo (season 2–) – one of the Alley Boys, allied to Genny.
Riccardo Ciccarelli as Nicola (season 2–4) – a member of the Alley Boys.
Salvatore Vacca as 'o Flipper (season 1–) – one of the Alley Boys, Genny's ally.
Carlo Cerciello as Don Ruggero 'o Stregone (season 3) – the most important capocamorra within the Confederates,
Edoardo Sorgente as Gegè (season 3) – a boy who studied in England from Secondigliano and a friend of Genny, who later becomes his accountant in Rome.
Pasquale Esposito as Edward 'o Sciarmant Arenella (season 3) – Capocamorra of Forcella and the Spanish Quarters and a member of the Confederates.
Angela Ciaburri as Carmela Villa (season 3) – Enzo's sister.
Roberto Olivieri as Ronni (3–) –a member of the Taliban, he is one of the most important men of the cosca.
Alessandro Palladino as 'o Bellebbuono (season 3–) – a member of the Enzo clan, of which he is one of the most important members.
Eugenio Marzella as Eliuccio (season 3–4) – a soldier of the Enzo clan.
Marcello Gravina as 'o Frisbi (season 3–4) – a soldier of the Enzo clan.
Livio Cori as 'o Selfi (seasons 3–4) – a soldier of the Taliban. He will always remain faithful to Enzo.
Mariano Coletti as 'o Cantonese (season 3–) – a soldier of the Taliban and friend of Ronni.
Francesco Capriello as 'a Golia (season 3–4) – one of the most important Taliban soldiers.
Gina Amarante as Maria (season 3–4) – Enzo's girlfriend and is the only female member of her band.
Roberto Russo as Topmodel (season 3–4) – a soldier of the Enzo clan.
Francesco Da Vinci as MMA (season 3–) – one of Enzo's men.
Riccardo Marotta as 'o Snicher (season 3–4) – a soldier from the Forcella clan.
Gennaro Apicella as Francesco Ciccio Levante (season 4–) – Arm of the Levante family, very attached to their father Gerlando, whose orders are meticulously carried out.
Antonio Gargiulo as Saro Levante (season 4–) – brother of Francis and Michelangelo Levante, armed wing of his family, he is very close to his father Gerlando, whose orders he carries out together with his brother Francesco.
Claudia Tranchese as Grazia Levante (season 4–) – She is the youngest daughter of the clan leader Gerlando Levante, and therefore the only sister of Michelangelo, Ciccio and Saro Levante.
Alessio Galati as Lino (season 4) – cousin of Nicola.
Andrea Renzi as Alberto Resta (season 4) – estimated and skilled successful manager who goes into business with Genny for the construction of the airport.
Gennaro Maresca as Walter Ruggeri (season 4–) – a magistrate.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (2014) ===
In Naples, the Savastano clan is commanded by the dreaded and respected Pietro Savastano. Looking to make his mark, Ciro Di Marzio is tasked to burn the house of the mother of Salvatore Conte, a rival drug lord. After completing the task without hesitation, and slowly gaining the trust of Pietro, he later entrusts Ciro to ready his son Gennaro to become the future head of the clan.
Following a police check, Pietro is arrested and taken into custody; control of the clan unofficially passes into the hands of his wife, Immacolata, who deems Ciro and Gennaro unable to run the clan in Pietro's absence. Immacolata, who maintains a dislike for Ciro, orders him to travel to Spain in order to make-up with Conte and reunite the clans. She later tasks Gennaro to travel to Honduras, hoping his interactions with drug producers will fast-track his development into becoming head of the clan. Despite being able to make peace with Conte, Ciro is frozen out by Immacolata, a sentiment that is shared by Gennaro once he returns to Naples. Gennaro, becoming more detached and isolated, begins a cleanup of the clan's members, inviting more younger comrades, while engaging in actions which leads to the distrust of the old guard, including Ciro, who find him unable to handle the clan. A civil war then ensues between the two factions of the Savastano clan: the old guard who are faithful to Pietro, and the younger members who are faithful to Gennaro.
Ciro, feeling ignored and devalued by Gennaro, aligns with the old guard, seeking to change the internal equilibrium of the clan. He also solicits support from Conte, managing to obtain Conte's respect during his trip to Spain. Ciro begins by killing Immacolata; however, Gennaro quickly discovers his betrayal and, no longer knowing who to trust, enlists the members loyal to him in order to dismantle the old guard he believes to be Ciro's accomplices. Gennaro largely succeeds, killing everyone besides Ciro and Malammore, who manage to escape into hiding. Gennaro later discovers where to find Ciro, sending the members loyal to him to kill him, but they are intercepted and brutally massacred by Conte's clan. Gennaro is later shot by Ciro, while Malammore breaks Pietro out of a police transport van while being transferred to a new prison.


=== Season 2 (2016) ===
Following his escape, Pietro arrives at the realization that his stay in Naples will be short-lived, and promptly flees to Cologne, leaving the clan in the hands of Malammore and the rest of the members that aided his escape. He also plots to seek vengeance on the people who ambushed Gennaro, who survived his shooting. Ciro, meanwhile, forms an alliance with Conte, at the expense of his relationship with his wife, Debora.
A year later, Gennaro is healed from his injuries and reunites with his father in Germany, where they align with the Avitables. After an arms deal goes awry, Pietro becomes wary of his power waning, and decides to return to Naples alone to resume control of the clan. Ciro and other members of Conte's clan encounter trouble with Conte, disliking his aims at creating a monopoly and gaining absolute power. They then devise a successful scheme to kill him. Pietro views this as the perfect opportunity to exact revenge, taking advantage of the disjointed clan by murdering several of them. Ciro learns of Pietro's return, and wishes to negotiate a settlement. Patrizia informs him, however, that he will only be able to negotiate with Gennaro. Wary of a potential ambush, Ciro goes to Giuseppe, a mutual friend of his and Gennaro, to act as guarantor during their negotiations. Gennaro eventually accepts the settlement conditions set by Ciro, which infuriates Pietro. Gennaro explains killing Ciro would have caused a war without any boundaries, and wishes to focus on business.
Pietro rejects the settlement, and continues to wage war, revealing to Patrizia that he wishes to defeat his son for undermining him. He is also suspicious of Patrizia's loyalties. After violently killing another member of the clan, in which he plants evidence to make it appear as the murder was as result of in-house betrayal, in-fighting becomes rife within the clan. However, after failing to subvert another member, Ciro learns of the true murderer, and informs Gennaro. Ciro decides to murder Pietro, and ramps up his efforts after Pietro also succeeds in murdering his young daughter. Gennaro, disgusted by his father's actions, while also wishing to raise his son (who is named after his father) in a world without in-fighting or violence, agrees. Gennaro then informs Ciro of Pietro's whereabouts, who murders him.


=== Season 3 (2017) ===
Gennaro assumes full control of all drug trade in Naples. He becomes feared and respected among the underworld. However, Ciro loses the will to continue, and after killing Malammore to avenge his daughter, moves to Sofia to work for Valentin, an associate. He later finds out Mladen (Valentin's son) tried to set him up, and since he's Valentin's successor, he hesitantly orders Ciro's death. Ciro however, murders Valentin and his son Mladen, and returns to Naples, while Giuseppe is in prison after Gennaro reveals his criminal past to the police.
Giuseppe quickly avoids jail time by agreeing to a plea deal, and is placed on house arrest instead. He then orders the systematic destruction of Gennaro and his criminal empire, robbing and killing his lieutenants, which leaves him isolated in his war against Giuseppe. Gennaro then seeks assistance from Ciro and Annalisa, who are both eager to return to power. Ciro initially aims to locate allies outside Naples, however, he meets Enzo and Valerio, members of the Santo clan, who convince him only people from the city truly wish for Giuseppe's demise. Together, they help Gennaro resume business, while Gennaro also bribes lawmakers and police officials to aid his cause.
However, Enzo begins to have reservations when many of his men begin to die at the hands of the Confederates, and wishes to leave. The Confederates, outraged, attempt to murder his sister by bombing the restaurant she works at, which begins a war between Enzo and Valerio, against them. Ciro desperately proposes an armistice, which is reluctantly accepted. Enzo's reservations are maintained, however, which forces Gennaro to kill his sister, which he then blames on Arenella (a member of the Confederates). This increases Enzo's involvement, and they successfully organize an ambush on Giuseppe and Arenella.
Following this, Ciro pushes Gennaro to create peace with all their enemies. Peace is eventually accepted, and Gennaro divides the city and other land to the people who helped him win. Patrizia later kills Annalisa, which arouses Enzo's suspicions, as Patrizia vocally opposed murder during the war. He later stalks her, and learns Gennaro was involved in his sister's murder. Inviting both him and Ciro on his yacht under the pretense of celebration, Enzo reveals his intentions to kill Gennaro. Prior to shooting him, however, Ciro sacrifices himself in his place by admitting to murdering his sister, stating his desire to avoid another war, and wishing to re-join his family in heaven. Enzo then forces Gennaro to kill Ciro.


=== Season 4 (2019) ===


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Gomorrah is one of Sky's most-watched cable shows, and has gained critical acclaim for its characterization, pacing, atmosphere, acting, directing, and writing. The first season holds a 94% rating on review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes based on 17 reviews, and a Metacritic rating of 76 out of 100 based on 15 reviews.The show's success has also spawned its release to international markets, where it premiered in the United Kingdom on Sky Atlantic on 4 August 2014, and in the United States on SundanceTV on 24 August 2016. The show regularly features as one of each network's most watched cable shows.
However, the show has received criticism from several Italian politicians. Naples mayor Luigi de Magistris has claimed that bouts of violent crimes skyrocket in the city whenever an episode of the series is aired. He also added that the series "is likely to corrode the brains, souls, and hearts of hundreds of very young people." Anti-Mafia magistrate Giuseppe Borrelli has stated that "the series fails to capture any aspect of today's Camorra", the national anti-mafia prosecutor Federico Cafiero de Raho has stated that "it humanizes gangsters", while the state prosecutor in Catanzaro Nicola Gratteri has stated that "it makes them seem likable, which is dangerous."


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (Italian)
Official website (American)
Gomorrah on IMDb