Robert J. Cabral Station

Robert J. Cabral Station, otherwise known as the Stockton – Downtown Station or Stockton ACE Station, is a railway station in Stockton, California. In 2003, she station building was named in honor of the late Robert J. Cabral, a San Joaquin County supervisor instrumental in the creation of the Altamont Corridor Express (ACE), originally Altamont Commuter Express.The station is the terminus for the ACE train line to San Jose Diridon Station and is also served by Amtrak San Joaquin trains between Sacramento and Bakersfield.  San Joaquin trains between Oakland and Bakersfield do not pass this station (SKT) and instead use the Stockton - San Joaquin Street Station (SKN). Stockton is thus one of the smallest cities in North America with two separate, full-fledged intercity train stations.The overall design of the station is based on Italian Renaissance and Spanish Revival prototypes. It follows the classical Palladian five-part plan in which there is a center block connected to two end wings by hyphens. The brick building includes extensive terracotta detailing, such as stylized rope around the large arched windows and a wide frieze that runs around the structure.


== History ==
The station building was built by the Southern Pacific Railroad in 1930, replacing an earlier Stockton station located a few blocks to the south. Passenger trains to the station were discontinued in 1972. Abandoned in the early 1980s, the depot fell into disrepair.
Altamont Commuter Express service commenced operations with Stockton as its terminus in 1998, and the San Joaquin started service here the following year. In 2001, the San Joaquin Regional Rail Commission (SJRRC), which provides ACE, purchased the old depot for $236,000 (equivalent to $334 thousand adjusted for inflation). Within a year, plans were drawn up for a full $6.5 million restoration that was completed in 2003. The majority of the funds came through “Measure K,” a local voter-approved ½ cent sales tax dedicated to transportation improvement projects.The station exterior was updated in early 2010 with improvements to the parking lot and landscaping, including added handicapped parking.
In FY2010 Robert J. Cabral Station was the 40th-busiest of Amtrak's 73 California stations, boarding or detraining an average of about 95 passengers daily.


== Platforms and tracks ==
The station has one side platform. 


== Transit connections ==
A dozen San Joaquin Regional Transit District feeder and commuter bus lines stop at or near the station.
Amtrak Thruway Bus line 6 to San Jose makes 6 daily trips each way and line 34 makes two daily trips, both stop at the Dublin/Pleasanton BART station.


== References ==


== External links ==
Stockton, CA – Amtrak
Amtrak California – Stockton ACE
ACE Stockton Station / Robert J. Cabral Station
Stockton-Cabral Station (SKT)--Great American Stations (Amtrak)