Parkview Arts and Science Magnet High School

For other places with this name, see Parkview School (disambiguation).Parkview Arts and Science Magnet High School is a magnet school in Little Rock, Arkansas, United States that concentrates heavily on science and the arts. It is Arkansas' first and only interdistrict high school. Although administered by the Little Rock School District, Parkview may receive students from the Pulaski County Special School District and the North Little Rock School District. It is commonly referred to as Little Rock Parkview.
Little Rock Parkview teaches grades 9 through 12, and has an average enrollment of 1,120 students.


== Academics ==


=== Curriculum ===
In 2005, Parkview High School was named in the top 900 best high schools in the nation according to the Newsweek magazine's Top 1200 US Schools. Public schools are ranked according to a ratio called the Challenge Index.
Parkview's unique magnet major curriculum lets students enter the school under a 'magnet area,' their specific concentration while at Parkview. Available areas are science, vocal music, instrumental music (both band and orchestra), visual arts, drama, and dance. These areas have special course requirements necessary to complete the Parkview curriculum and receive a diploma seal upon graduation.


=== Debate ===
Parkview's debate teams, particularly Legal and Legislative, have a long history of success. At Arkansas Student Congress, a statewide tournament, the team won championships in 1992, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2013, and 2014 (and many other unknown years). These championships have been won under the coaching of Patricia Treadway.
In 2002, Parkview's Student Congress delegation finished first in the state competition. The Mock Trial team finished second in the state tournament in 2003. The next season, 2003–2004, Parkview's Student Congress delegation again won first place at the state competition and set the record high for points, beating the mark set by the 1992 Parkview team. Also in the 2003-2004 season, the Parkview debate team won second place at the state's mock trial competition. One of its members, T. Luke Frauenthal, advanced to the semifinals at the Harvard Student Congress Tournament.
Parkview High School 2005 Legal and Legislative Debate finished first in the state at both Student Congress and Mock Trial. The team went on to represent Arkansas at the National Tournament where it placed 14th in the nation. The team continued its success the following year, again winning at both Student Congress and Mock Trial. Jacob Kauffman garnered Best Delegate honors, and the team set a record for points earned at Student Congress. The following year, 2007, the Student Congress delegation returned and received yet another victory. Breaking the previous record by ten points, the team shattered all expectations. The Legal and Legislative Debate team was the first to win both State Student Congress and State Mock Trial two years in a row.
Parkview Legal and Legislative debaters exceeded their own record to capture the 2008 State Student Congress title. In 2009, they placed first in both Student Congress and Mock Trial. They represented Arkansas at the National Mock Trial Championships in Atlanta, finishing 15th nationally. During the 2009-2010 year, the team went on to win the State Student Congress title as well as the State Mock Trial championship. The team represented Arkansas in the National High School Mock Trial Championship in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania that spring.
In 2014, the Parkview Mock Trial team had what would become the start of two years of extraordinary success. Parkview went into the 2014 state mock trial competition with two teams. At the conclusion of the two days of competition, the Parkview Mock Trial team walked away with not only the state title but second place as well. Parkview became the first high school in Arkansas to achieve this feat, and would go on to represent Arkansas at the national championship that same year in Madison, Wisconsin. In the following year Parkview would take the state title and second place once again. Parkview is the only high school in Arkansas to achieve first and second place in the same year consecutively. The Parkview Mock Trial team went on to once again represent Arkansas at the 2015 National Championship in Raleigh, North Carolina. Parkview Mock Trial also has International success by competing in the Empire World Mock Trial Championship in New York City. Parkview has so far competed at Empire from 2011 to 2015. Parkview also competed at the inaugural Empire San Francisco competition in 2014.
The Parkview Legal and Legislative Debate won the Best Overall Delegation award at the 2013 Arkansas State Student Congress. Individually, the debaters received 12 Superior Award medals and 6 Awards of Excellent gavel pins. In 2014, the last year of long time coach Patricia G. Treadway, Parkview would make a sweep of the awards at the Arkansas State Student Congress competition. Parkview not only received the Best Overall Delegation award, but numerous others as well. Parkview delegates performed outstandingly, senior Sean Anderson received the Mary Ingalls Award for his use of Parliamentary Procedure, while senior Hannah Burdette was named Best Delegate. Senior Josie Efird received the Best of Delegation Award. Concluding the 2014 competition, Parkview coach Patricia G. Treadway, learned at the event that an award bearing her name has been endowed by the Arkansas Communication and Theater Arts Association.  In the future, the Patricia G. Treadway Award will be bestowed to the highest scoring student senator in the college division.


=== Drama ===
Parkview is also known for its Drama Department. The 2009 fall show was The Imaginary Invalid by Molière, and included seniors Dylan Clifford, Phoenix Smithey, Brianna Kordsmeier, and Gabriella Baltzley, and juniors Ashley Nolen and Max Hill. The musical was Anything Goes, featuring Nina Harris as Reno, Brandon Nichols as Billy, Gabriella Baltzley as Hope, and Jeremy Grandison as Moonface. The Drama Department also does many annual shows, including: Murder Mystery in September, Rendezvous and Tales of the Crypt in October, Medieval Feast in December, and a Black History Month presentation at the Clinton Library in February.


=== Model United Nations ===
The Parkview High School Model United Nations team also enjoys a long and proud history of success. Parkview sent delegations of varying sizes to various conferences, including: Arkansas Model United Nations, Model United Nations Illinois, ASU Jonesboro Model United Nations, and Mid South Model United Nations. In 2006, the Parkview delegation to Arkansas Model United Nations delivered a victory under the leadership of Mexico Head Delegate Trenton J. Morrow, achieving a best delegation award. Delegate Kevin Kim received a delegate award.


=== Newspaper ===
The school newspaper, The Constitution, is a member of the High School National Ad Network.


=== Quiz Bowl ===
The Parkview Quiz Bowl team also competed in the 2005 school year. The Quiz Bowl team won the State NAQT Tournament and represented Arkansas in the High School NAQT Championships. The Team also placed fourth in the State 5A Championships. Karthik Soora placed 101st in the NAQT individuals, Nick Misenheimer placed 156th, and Patrick Kangrga placed 263rd. In the Regional and State individual rankings, Karthik Soora placed 3rd regionally and 5th in the State. Patrick Kangrga was 10th in the Region and 6th in the State.
In 2007, the Parkview Quiz Bowl team placed 1st in the entire Beta Club Convention's Quiz Bowl event. Georgeanne Yehling placed 2nd in Creative Writing; Esther Im placed 1st in sketch, and Spencer Smith placed 1st in scratch art. The Quiz Bowl team went on to compete at the Beta Club national competition in Nashville, Tennessee, where they placed second overall in the Quiz Bowl competition. Furthermore, the team won the 6A State Final for AGQBA Quiz Bowl, the state Quiz Bowl format.
The Quiz Bowl team also had a successful season in 2008. They qualified for NAQT nationals at their first tournament of the season in Tulsa, Oklahoma. The team again won the 6A State Final tournament, broadcast on AETN, the state PBS station. At the national tournament in Chicago, the team placed 113th overall. Silas Altheimer placed 171st and Georgeanne Yehling placed 200th in the individual statistics.
Last year, the Quiz Bowl team came back with a vengeance. They won the 6A State Final tournament, and NAQT state, despite efforts by Watson Chapel. Their leader, Seemaab Ali, along with other players Connor Thompson, John Sykes, Chris Altheimer, Darcie Moore, Laura Yoder, Catie Meyer, Alex Smith, Ryan Nakamoto, Josh Woods, Kerry Richmond and Eric Carter, dominated everything they ever did.


=== Science and Engineering ===
With the integration of emerging technology, such as 3D-printers, CNC millers, and computer-aided design software, Parkview has the cutting edge in engineering education, implementing the PLTW curriculum. Since 2012, Parkview has participated in what is known as BEST Robotics. Each year, Parkview takes their "Real Steel" Robotics team to compete at various hub-level BEST events. Parkview's team attends the Central Arkansas Hub typically held at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock. In 2012 and also in 2017, the team advanced to the next Hub, which is known as Frontier Trails, held at the University of Arkansas - Fort Smith.
In November 2017, Real Steel Robotics represented Parkview very well at the Hub in Little Rock. The team took home the Third Place BEST Award, presented to the team that best embodies the concept of Boosting Engineering, Science, and Technology, as well as the Founder's Award, the Second Place Spirit and Sportsmanship Award, and the Fourth Place Engineering Notebook Award. The team was excited for their winnings, and kept themselves prepared for Frontier Trails.


== Athletics ==
The Parkview High School mascot is the Patriot with red, white, and blue as the school colors.
For 2012–14, the Parkview Patriots compete in the 6A Classification administered by the Arkansas Activities Association within the 7A/6A Central Conference. The Patriots participate in baseball, basketball (boys/girls), bowling, cheer, cross country, dance, debate, football, golf (boys/girls), soccer (boys/girls), softball, swimming & diving (boys/girls), track & field (boys/girls), and volleyball.
Football: The Patriots football team won three consecutive state football titles in 1977, 1978, and 1979.
Basketball: Between 1977 and 2012, the boys basketball team has won twelve (12) state basketball championships. In 1988 and 1992, the boys basketball team won the Arkansas high school overall title when the state held a tournament of classification champions. In 2012, Parkview basketball teams won 6A state championships; the girls team won 50–31 over Russellville High School and the boys team won 69–65 in double overtime over Jonesboro High School.


== Notable alumni ==
The following are notable people associated with Parkview High School. If the person was a Parkview High School student, the number in parentheses indicates the year of graduation; if the person was a faculty or staff member, that person's title and years of association are included:

Jamaal Anderson (2004)—professional football player (NFL)
David Auburn (1977)—playwright.
John Irving Blume (aka Joe Bob Briggs) (1971)—actor; writer; movie critic; columnist.
Kevin Brockmeier (1991)—novelist who wrote Brief History Of The Dead.
Derek Fisher (1992)—professional basketball player and coach (NBA); 5x NBA champion.
Keith Jackson (1984)—member of College Football Hall of Fame and former professional football player (NFL).
Quincy Lewis (1995)—professional basketball player.
Art Porter, Jr. (1979)—jazz saxophonist.
Frank Scott Jr., politician
Duane Washington (1982)—professional basketball player (NBA).


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Parkview at Little Rock School District website