Kamiakin Junior High

Kamiakin Middle School is a middle school in Kirkland, Washington and is part of the Lake Washington School District. It was established in 1974, and accommodates 613 students as of October 2006. Many of its students go to Juanita High School. It is located about 1.5 miles northeast from Totem Lake Mall. The school is named after Kamiakin, a chief of the Yakama Tribe in the 19th century and a leader of the American Indian side in the Yakima War.


== Awards ==
Kamiakin's band program, formerly taught by Mr. Ward Brannman, has won praise from the community from their concerts and extraordinary efforts.
The class of 2001 gave the school their highest WASL scores ever, and students were awarded with a plaque that hangs in the trophy case near the entrance of the cafeteria.
In the school year of 2016-2017 the Kamiakin Middle School Band sent 18 students to Washington Jr. All-State Band, with four students being selected for the second year in a row.


== Sports ==
Kamiakin won many sports titles in the late 70s to early 80s. In 1982 the Kirkland National Little League team won the Little League World Series with many of those kids going to Kamiakin. The only recent titles they have acclaimed was the football title in 2004, badminton in 2006 and track titles for boys and girls track in 2006 and boys track in 2007 they have also won Math Olympiad titles in quite a few years, and has had students get a perfect 25 points on the AMC 8 math competition. They also won the district championship for 7th Grade Basketball in 2011. The Kamiakin Cougars offer 7th grade basketball, badminton, boys tennis, first season sports. They offer girls basketball 7-9 and boys basketball 8-9 in the second quarter. In the third quarter they have wrestling and 8-9 volleyball. In the 4th quarter they offer girls tennis, 7th grade volleyball, and boys and girls track. The Kamiakin Cougars compete against six other Middle schools in the Lake Washington school district. These schools are the Finn Hill Falcons (rivals also feed into Juanita),Kirkland Panthers, Evergreen Eagles, Redmond Grizzlies, Rose Hill Royal Pride, and the Inglewood Knights.


== Gifted Program ==
Kamiakin offers the Quest Gifted Program. 
The Middle School Quest program allows students to engage in challenging curriculum. The program meets the needs of students who have been identified as having exceptional cognitive and academic ability by accelerating and enriching the district curriculum. Classes include greater breadth and depth of subject matter and a wide variety of learning processes and teaching methods.


== Further reading ==
Kamiakin Middle School website


== References ==