Gangotri (film)

Gangotri is a 2003 Indian Telugu-language drama film which was released on 28 March 2003 and was directed by K. Raghavendra Rao and cinematography by Chota K. Naidu. Allu Arjun and Aditi Agarwal played the lead roles. This was Allu Arjun's first film as an actor and K. Raghavendra Rao's 100th film as director. Allu Aravind and C. Ashwini Dutt, both who are big-time producers, produced the film. The film was later dubbed into Malayalam and Hindi under the name Simhakutty (2003) and Gangotri (2014 by Goldmines Telefilms) respectively. .


== Plot ==
Neelakantham Naidu (Prakash Raj) is a big factionist who has a loyal confidant Narasimha (Suman), who is willing to give his life for the sake of his master. After many years, Neelakantham's wife Tulasi (Pragathi) gives birth to a baby girl, but all the earlier babies born to Neelakantham died due to some unknown reason. The priests advise Neelakantham to name his daughter Gangotri. They also warn Neelakantham that the child has 'jalagandam', hence they ask him to take Gangotri to the holy place of Gangotri (after which she was named) in the Himalayas and perform 'abhyangana snanam' (bathe with turmeric, milk, etc.) for the next 15 years. After 15 years, Gangotri would be free of any danger. When nobody could entertain the child Gangotri, Simhadri, the son of Narasimha entertains her with a song. Simhadri becomes a servant and friend to Gangotri.
They grow up together. Simhadri (Allu Arjun) and Gangotri (Aditi Agarwal) become good friends. In the meantime, Simhadri's mother (Seetha) sacrifices her life to save Neelakantham. When Gangotri attains puberty, her paternal aunt (Telangana Shakuntala) restricts Simhadri from meeting Gangotri as it would be wrong. When Simhadri comes to Gangotri's place clandestinely to meet her, they are caught by Neelakantham. Neelakantham's sister speaks badly about their relationship. Neelakantham beats Simhadri.
Meanwhile, Narasimha comes to the spot and interferes. This causes a rift between Neelakantham and Narasimha. Neelakantam is misinformed about Narasimha's intentions; hence, he has bombs planted in Narasimha's house. Simhadri is away at that time. When Simhadri comes to know that Neelakantam is responsible for the bombing, he comes to Neelakantam's house and challenges that he will marry Gangotri in a year. Then Simhadri goes to the holy place Gangotri and waits for his ladylove to come there for the final sacred bath. They try to elope, but Neelakantham sobes Simhadri with sword, and Gangotri commits suicide, which makes Neelakantham realize their love. Simhadri gets consciousness, with their favorite tune from flute, and gets back his love, and they hug each other.


== Cast ==


== Soundtrack ==
The Music Was Composed By M. M. Keeravani and Released by Aditya Music.


== Awards ==
Allu Arjun won the Santosham Best Young Performers Award
Allu Arjun won the CineMAA Award for Best Male Debut
Prakash Raj won the Nandi Award for Best Villain


== References ==


== External links ==
Gangotri on IMDb