Punta rock

Punta rock or Belizean punta is a form of the traditional punta rhythm of the Garifuna people of Belize, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras. Although most artist and bands are exclusively Garifuna, songs are usually in Kriol or Garifuna and rarely in Spanish, or English.


== Origins ==
Punta rock was created by Pen Cayetano in Belize in 1978. Punta is a genre of traditional music that developed among the Garifuna people of Belize, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras.
While this style is unique, calypso and soca have had slight influences on it. Like calypso and soca, Belizean punta was used for both social commentary and risqué humor, though the initial wave of punta acts eschewed the former. Lord Rhaburn and the Cross Culture Band were integral in the acceptance of punta by Belizeans (namely Kriols) by actually doing calypso songs about punta such as "Gumagrugu Watah" and "Punta Rock Eena Babylon".
Punta rock was brought to the U.S by Ideal Castillo. Ideal had learned punta rock with Chukupen Paulino and played with the original Larunihati Band (featured in the movie "The Mosquito Coast"). Ideal later met up with Pen Cayetano and Mohobub Flores in Dangriga and for a while was the youngest member of the Pen Cayetano's Turtle Shell Band. When Ideal came to the United States, he introduced Punta Rock to the Garifuna people living in the Bronx. He formed punta rock band Isanigu Punta Rock Soul-Jahs.


== Notable Artists and Bands ==


== Hit songs ==
"Mi Tradicion" - Kazzabe
"Sopa De Caracol" - Banda Blanca (3 million records sold. Originally recorded by Chico Ramos as 'Conch Soup'.)
"Punta Legacy" - Garifuna Legacy
"4 Men" - Super G
"Prym Tyme 69X" - Aziatic
"Flirting Vibe" - Aziatic jk
"Chatty Chatty" - Aziatic
"Go!" - Aziatic
"Punta Fever" - GX Team
"Seinsu Ya Meriga-Puppy Love( Seinsuman)1989
"Suavecito" - Garifuna Legacy
"Bounile" - Punta Cartel
"Hoo La Hoo" - Juventud Garifuna
"Leh tu To" - Garif
"Ti Boom Boom" - Reckless
"Flour Lob" - Mime
"On Fire" - Punta Rebels
"Dance With Me" - Punta Rebels
"Party" - Punta Rebels
"Wala Wine" - Super G
"Rapist" - Super G
"Nanigi" - Super G
"Ital Food" - Mohobub Flores
"Laluda Beyu" - Chicas Roland's
Lidan Dan- IDeal Castillo
Lidere Dan- Ideal castillo

"Va Canon" - Los Silverstar
ABC - Jah ft Di Plaga
"Paty" - Marcony Star
"Duby" - Xcstacy
"Noche De Sexo" - Eddy GNG
"Sara Sara" - Garifuna Kids
"Garinagu Waguya"- Los Seaboys
"Watina" - Eduardo Ballesteros
"Suba" -La Runy Hati Band
"Chulugua" - Fernandez Band
"Asa Tura" - Fernandez Band
"Cabanichiga Bu" - Eduardo Ballestero
"Manadi" - Estrellas Ubou
"Envidia" - Jimmy Suazo


== See also ==
Garifuna music
PuntaIDeal Castlillo Lida Dan
IDeal castillo Lidere Dan


== References ==


== External links ==
What is Puntarock? | Stonetree Records
What is Punta Rock? | Punta Rock auf Wisegeek.com