Investigation Discovery

Investigation Discovery (often abbreviated ID) is an American pay television network owned by Discovery, Inc. that features documentary-style programming dealing with true crime subjects, mostly those of a violent nature (primarily homicides and attempted homicides, but also kidnappings, stalkings, sexual assaults, domestic violence, disappearances, and arsons). As of February 2015, approximately 86,062,000 American households (73.9% of households with television) receive Investigation Discovery.


== History ==
The channel launched in 1996 under the name Discovery Civilization Network: The World History and Geography Channel. It was one of four digital networks rolled out by Discovery Communications simultaneously in October 1996. Plans for the channel had surfaced in November 1994, when its working name was "Time Traveler".In April 2002, New York Times Television and Discovery Communications announced a joint venture to run the Discovery Civilization Channel. By then, it was available in 14 million households. The partnership aimed to complement the historical shows, with programming about current events and contemporary history.
On March 25, 2003, the channel was rebranded as Discovery Times, focusing more on the culture of the United States, as well as other miscellaneous programming. The previous name was described as "a little off-message" by executives.In April 2006, The New York Times sold its stake in Discovery Times back to Discovery Communications, ending its ownership in the channel. On January 27, 2008, Discovery Times was relaunched as Investigation Discovery (ID), oriented towards true crime programs.In 2016, owing to a resurgence in popularity within the true crime genre, ID was the second-highest-rated cable network among women 25-54. In 2018, ID was the sixth-highest-rated basic cable network in full-day viewership.


== Programming ==

Most of ID's programs are original productions, but it also airs re-titled off-network reruns, including ABC's 20/20, CBS' 48 Hours, and NBC's Dateline.
ID's longest-running series is On The Case with Paula Zahn which debuted in 2009. Other long-running shows on the network include  Disappeared and Homicide Hunter: Lt. Joe Kenda.
On June 7, 2015, ID aired its first ever scripted mini-series; Serial Thriller: Angel of Decay chronicled the investigation of convicted (and later executed) serial killer Ted Bundy. A second installment, Serial Thriller: The Chameleon, premiered as a two-part miniseries in December 2015, chronicling the crimes that resulted in the execution of American serial killer Stephen Morin. A third installment, Serial Thriller: The Headhunter, about serial killer Edmund Kemper (which possibly includes the story of serial killer Herbert Mullin), premiered on February 20, 2016.


== International versions ==

Investigation Discovery (Canada)
Investigation Discovery (European TV channel)
Investigation Discovery (India) (Asia Pacific) (Closed on 1 February 2018)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website