Lee Mroszak

Lee Siegfried (born Lee Anthony Mroszak on December 11, 1968 in Minnesota), known by the on-air moniker Crazy Cabbie, is an American DJ. He broadcast on New York City's 92.3 K-Rock and is a former regular guest on The Howard Stern Show.
Mroszak previously worked for two radio stations in the Twin Cities, spending time as part of the 92 KQRS Morning Show. Mroszak was fired from KQRS after he faked a segment implying that Brett Favre was staying in a Minneapolis hotel with a woman other than his wife.
Mroszak began his radio career as a frequent caller known as "Cabbie" on The Andy Savage Show, airing on Minneapolis' 93.7 The Edge. When Howard Stern's show came to town, Mroszak moved to the KQRS Morning Show, the highest rated morning drive show in Minneapolis.


== KQRS hijinks ==
Mroszak raised his visibility at KQRS as a street reporter who took some listeners on a tour of the city's crack cocaine market. In one attempt to be outrageous, Mroszak did a "remote report" in which he claimed to have knocked on NFL star Brett Favre's hotel room door when the NFL's Green Bay Packers were in town for a Monday night game. Mroszak claimed that he intended to offer Favre some Vicodin and a six-pack of beer, but that he instead discovered the quarterback with a naked female who was not his wife. The report ended abruptly, but the press contacted the station for further information. Mroszak was forced into hiding, but eventually admitted that the story was completely fabricated. With his credibility shattered, Mroszak was fired by KQRS on December 3, 1997, and the station was sued by Favre.
Mroszak was not forgotten by old friend Cane (from his 93.7 The Edge days), who brought Mroszak to 92.3 K-Rock (WXRK) New York to produce his  afternoon show. Mroszak used his new job to appear on The Howard Stern Show.


== The Howard Stern Show ==
On The Howard Stern Show, Mroszak would often discuss his paratrooper service during Operation Desert Storm, events that occurred during his stint as a deejay for K-Rock radio, and the many bizarre incidents in his personal life.
On the March 23, 2001 show, The Howard Stern Show paid Mroszak $3,000 to air the details of his discharge from the military. Mroszak revealed that he and several other men had sex with the daughter of a Delta Force Sergeant Major. The interview shifted to Stern interrogating Mroszak about his involvement in a sexual situation that involved the presence of several men. Mroszak confirmed that he has engaged in homosexual sex but contends that he is not attracted to men.Mroszak fought two boxing matches during his association with The Howard Stern Show. On April 27, 2001, he fought Wack Pack member Angry Black to a five-round draw and on May 31, 2002 he was defeated by Stuttering John by unanimous decision.
On September 11, 2001, Mroszak called into The Howard Stern Show—by then one of only a couple of local broadcasts still on the air—and helped explain that airplanes that people witnessed in Manhattan were United States Air Force fighters sent to patrol Manhattan airspace.
On the January 6, 2003 show, Mroszak had an on-air reunion with his biological mother, who claimed to have given him up as a newborn for adoption because she could not afford to raise him.
On July 27, 2006, Mroszak was released from prison after serving a one-year sentence for tax evasion, and immediately went to Sirius Satellite Radio to visit Howard Stern. On August 15, 2006, Mroszak substituted for Sirius radio host Scott Ferrall, who was on vacation.
In 2004, Mroszak allowed a porno film featuring Ron Jeremy and Tabitha Stevens to be shot in Howard Stern's studio without permission. When confronted by Stern and crew in 2006, Mroszak contended that he produced the film but did not directly participate, but rather played "a Steven Spielberg type role" and that the film had been destroyed. On February 8, 2007, Stern questioned whether Mroszak could ever again be trusted, while Fred described the porn antics as "a sign of disrespect." In 2009, Ron Jeremy confirmed that Mroszak acted in the movie.On June 28, 2007, Mroszak was fired by Sirius Satellite Radio after claiming on his website and on the Opie and Anthony radio show  that he was in possession of a Howard Stern sex tape.In a 2015 interview on a podcast, Mroszak stated that he had not worked in radio since he was fired from Sirius.


== Tax trouble ==
Mroszak spent one year in federal prison for tax evasion. He was arrested after saying on the November 9, 2004 Howard Stern Show that he did not file a tax return in many years and would not resume filing until the U.S. government cured his Gulf War Syndrome. An IRS employee happened to be listening and reported him. Mroszak pleaded guilty to tax evasion in federal court in December 2004, and was sentenced to one year in prison and ordered to pay his outstanding taxes.
On July 29, 2005, Mroszak was imprisoned at the Federal Correctional Institution in Fort Dix, New Jersey. On February 27, 2006, it was reported on The Howard Stern Show that he was "recently" moved to Federal Medical Center (FMC) Devens in Ayer, Massachusetts.
Mroszak was released from prison on July 27, 2006 and appeared on The Howard Stern Show that same day to discuss his prison experiences.


== Personal ==
In September 2017, Mroszak revealed on social media that he was suffering from Guillain-Barré syndrome and had become paralyzed from the waist down. He's currently undergoing treatment to recover from the disease.


== References ==


== External links ==
Instagram @crazycabbie