Prudence Crandell

Prudence Crandall (September 3, 1803 – January 27, 1890) was an American schoolteacher and activist.
Crandall is remembered, and is the state heroine of Connecticut, for setting up the first school for black girls ("young Ladies and little Misses of color") in the country. This resulted in her arrest; then violence from townspeople forced her to close the school, and she left Connecticut. However, when she admitted Sarah Harris, a 20-year-old African-American female student in 1832, she had what is considered to be the first integrated classroom in the United States. Parents of the white children began to withdraw them. Rather than ask the African-American student to leave, she decided that if white girls could not attend with the blacks, she would educate blacks. She was arrested and spent a night in jail. Soon the violence of the townspeople forced her to close the school and leave. Much later the Connecticut legislature, with pressure from Mark Twain, a resident of Hartford, passed a resolution honoring Crandall and providing her with a pension. Twain offered to buy her former Canterbury home for her retirement, but she declined. She died a few years later, in 1890.


== Early life ==
Prudence Crandall was born on September 3, 1803, to Pardon and Esther Carpenter Crandall, a Quaker couple who lived in Carpenter's Mills, Rhode Island. When she was about 10, her father moved the family to nearby Canterbury, Connecticut. As her father thought little of the local public school, he paid for her to attend the Black Hill Quaker School in Plainfield, 5 miles (8.0 km) east of Canterbury. Her teacher there, Rowland Greene, was opposed to slavery, and much later gave an address, published in Garrison's Liberator, on the necessity of education for blacks, and commended Isaac C. Glasgow for sending two of his daughters, "exemplary young women", to Crandall's school for young ladies of color.When 22, for one year she attended the New England Yearly Meeting School, a Quaker boarding school in Providence, Rhode Island. That the school existed was due to the generosity of Moses Brown, an abolitionist and co-founder of Brown University; in 1904 the school renamed itself the Moses Brown School. After graduating, Prudence Crandall taught a school in Plainfield.


== Establishment of the boarding school ==

In 1831, she purchased a house, with her sister Almira Crandall, to establish the Canterbury Female Boarding School, at the request of Canterbury's aristocratic residents, to educate young girls in the town. With the help of her sister and a maid, she taught about forty children in different subjects including geography, history, grammar, arithmetic, reading, and writing. As principal of the female boarding school, Prudence Crandall was deemed successful in her ability to educate young girls, and the school flourished until September 1832.


== Integration of the boarding school ==

Although Prudence Crandall grew up as a North American Quaker, she admitted that she was not acquainted with many people of color or abolitionists.  She discovered the problems that plagued people of color through the abolitionist newspaper The Liberator, which she learned of through her housekeeper, "a young black lady", whose fiancé was the son of the paper's local agent. After reading The Liberator, Prudence Crandall said in an earlier account that she  "contemplated for a while, the manner in which I might best serve the people of color."Prudence Crandall's chance to help people of color came in the fall of 1832. Sarah Harris, the daughter of a free African-American farmer near Canterbury, asked to be accepted to the school to prepare for teaching other African Americans.Although Crandall was uncertain about the reception of Harris, she eventually admitted the girl, establishing what is believed to be the first integrated classroom in the United States. Many prominent townspeople objected and placed pressure on Crandall to dismiss Harris from the school, but Crandall refused. Although the white students in the school did not openly oppose the presence of Sarah Harris, families of the current white students removed their daughters from the school.Consequently, Crandall devoted herself to teaching African-American girls. She temporarily closed the school and began directly recruiting new students of color and on March 2, 1833, William Lloyd Garrison, an abolitionist and supporter of the school, placed advertisements for new pupils in his newspaper The Liberator. Crandall announced that on the first Monday of April 1833, she would open a school "for the reception of young ladies and little misses of color, ... Terms, $25 per quarter, one half paid in advance." Her references including leading abolitionists Arthur Tappan, Samuel J. May, and Garrison.As word of the school spread, African-American families began arranging enrollment of their daughters in Crandall's academy. On April 1, 1833, twenty African-American girls from Boston, Providence, New York, Philadelphia, and the surrounding areas in Connecticut arrived at Miss Crandall's School for Young Ladies and Little Misses of Color.


== Public backlash ==
Leading the reaction to Crandall's school for black girls was her neighbor, Andrew Judson, an attorney and Canterbury's leading politician, having represented it in both the Connecticut House and Senate, and would soon be Connecticut's at-large member of the U.S. House of Representatives. In the national debate that was awkwardly taking place over "what to do" with the freed or soon-to-be-freed slaves, Judson supported "colonization": sending them to (not "back to") Africa (see American Colonization Society). He said: "we are not merely opposed to the establishment of that school in Canterbury; we mean there shall not be such a school set up anywhere in our State. The colored people can never rise from their menial condition in our country; they ought not to be permitted to rise here. They are an inferior race of beings, and never call or ought to be recognized as the equals of the whites." "He predicted the destruction of the town if Crandall's school for colored children succeeded." Judson was also involved in efforts to capture David Garrison and turn him over to Southerners; there was a $10,000 reward.In response to the new school, a committee of four prominent white men in the town, Rufus Adams, Daniel Frost Jr., Andrew Harris, and Richard Fenner, attempted to convince Crandall that her school for young women of color would be detrimental to the safety of the white people in the town of Canterbury. Frost claimed that the boarding school would encourage "social equality and intermarriage of whites and blacks." To this her response was "Moses had a black wife."At first, citizens of Canterbury protested the school and then held town meetings "to devise and adopt such measures as would effectually avert the nuisance, or speedily abate it." The town response escalated into warnings, threats, and acts of violence against the school. Crandall was faced with great local opposition, and her detractors had no plans to back down.
On May 24, 1833, the Connecticut legislature passed a "Black Law", which prohibited a school from teaching African-American students from outside the state without town permission. In July, Crandall was arrested and placed in the county jail for one night—she refused to be bonded out, as she wished the public to know she was being jailed. (A Vermont newspaper reported it under the headline "Shame on Connecticut".) The next day she was released under bond to await her trial.Under the Black Law, the townspeople refused any amenities to the students or Crandall, closing their shops and meeting houses to them. Stage drivers refused to provide them with transportation, and the town doctors refused to treat them. Townspeople poisoned the school's well—its only water source—with animal feces, and prevented Crandall from obtaining water from other sources. Not only did Crandall and her students receive backlash, her father was insulted and threatened by the citizens of Canterbury. Although she faced extreme difficulties, Crandall continued to teach the young women of color which angered the community even further.
Crandall's students also suffered. Ann Eliza Hammond, a 17-year-old student, was arrested; however, with the help of local abolitionist Samuel J. May, she was able to post bail bond. Some $10,000 was raised through collections and donations.


== Judicial proceedings ==
Arthur Tappan of New York, a prominent abolitionist, donated $10,000 to hire the best lawyers to defend Crandall throughout her trials. The first opened at the Windham County Court on August 23, 1833. The case challenged the constitutionality of the Connecticut law prohibiting the education of African Americans from outside the state.
The defense argued that African Americans were citizens in other states, so therefore there was no reason why they should not be considered as such in Connecticut. Thus, they focused on the deprivation of the rights of African-American students under the United States Constitution. By contrast, the prosecution denied the fact that freed African-Americans were citizens in any state. The county court jury ultimately failed to reach a decision for the cases.A second trial in Superior Court decided against the school, and the case was taken to the Supreme Court of Errors (now called the Connecticut Supreme Court) on appeal in July 1834. The Connecticut high court reversed the decision of the lower court, dismissing the case on July 22 because of a procedural defect.  The Black Law prohibited the education of black children from outside of Connecticut unless permission was granted by the local civil authority and town selectmen.  But the prosecution's information that charged Crandall had not alleged that she had established her school without the permission of the civil authority and selectmen of Canterbury.  Therefore, the Supreme Court held that the information was fatally defective because the conduct which it alleged did not constitute a crime. The Court did not address the issue of whether the citizenship of free African Americans had to be recognized in every state.The judicial process had not stopped the operation of the Canterbury boarding school, but townspeople's vandalism against it increased. The residents of Canterbury were so angry that the court had dismissed the case that vandals set the school on fire in January 1834, but they failed in their attempts to destroy the school. In September 9, 1834, a group of townspeople broke almost ninety  window glass panes using heavy iron bars.  For the safety of her students, her family and herself, Prudence Crandall closed her school on September 10, 1834.Connecticut officially repealed the Black Law in 1838.


== Later years ==
At the suggestion of William Garrison, who raised the money from "various antislavery socities", Francis Alexander painted a portrait of Prudence in April, 1834. She had to go to Boston for the sittings, where she "became the center of attention at abolitionist parties and gatherings each evening. The Boston abolitionists honored her as a true heroine of the antislavery cause."In August 1834, Prudence Crandall married the Rev. Calvin Philleo, a Baptist preacher in Canterbury, Connecticut. The couple moved to Massachusetts for a period of time after they fled the town of Canterbury, and they also lived in New York, Rhode Island, and Illinois. Prudence left him in 1842, after his "deteriorating physical and mental health" led him to be irritable and abusive.  It was later, in Illinois, that Rev. Calvin Philleo died in 1874.After the death of her husband, Crandall relocated with her brother Hezekiah to Elk Falls, Kansas around 1877, and it was there that her brother eventually died in 1881. A visitor of 1886, who described her as "of almost national renown," with "a host of good books in her house", quoted her as follows:

My whole life has been one of opposition. I never could find anyone near me to agree with me. Even my husband opposed me, more than anyone. He would not let me read the books that he himself read, but I did read them. I read all sides, and searched for the truth whether it was in science, religion, or humanity. I sometimes think I would like to live somewhere else. Here, in Elk Falls, there is nothing for my soul to feed upon. Nothing, unless it comes from abroad in the shape of books, newspapers, and so on. There is no public library, and there are but one or two persons in the place that I can converse with profitably for any length of time. No one visits me, and I begin to think they are afraid of me. I think the ministers are afraid I shall upset their religious beliefs, and advise the members of their congregation not to call on me, but I don't care. I speak on spiritualism sometimes, but more on temperance, and am a self-appointed member of the International Arbitration League. I don't want to die yet. I want to live long enough to see some of these reforms consummated.
In 1886, the state of Connecticut honored Prudence Crandall with an act by the legislature, prominently supported by writer Mark Twain, providing her with a $400 annual pension (equivalent to $11,200 in 2018). Prudence Crandall died in Kansas on January 28, 1890, at the age of 86. She and her brother Hezekiah are buried in Elk Falls Cemetery.Other members of the family had difficulty with authorities during the 1830s. In May 1835, their brother, Reuben Crandall, who had studied medicine at Yale and taught botany, had moved from Peekskill, New York to Washington, D.C. He received a medical license there, and began giving lectures and cataloging plants. His trunks held many Anti-Slavery Society tracts and newspapers (some of which he used to wrap plants). On August 10, 1835, two constables arrested him on the charge of possession of abolitionist tracts with the intent to distribute them. A lynch mob gathered at the jail and U.S. Attorney Francis Scott Key prosecuted him. This was a short time after rioting by whites against blacks that had followed the alleged attempted murder of a white woman by a mentally ill slave, Arthur Bowen. Crandall was jailed for eight months before the two-week trial, but the jury acquitted him of all five charges. However, Crandall had contracted tuberculosis (TB), which had no known treatment. After returning briefly to Connecticut, he moved in 1836 to the milder climate of Jamaica in the Caribbean, where he died of the disease, at age 30.Prudence's sister Almira died in 1837 In 1838 her brother Pardon died, followed days later by her sister-in-law Clarissa, who had just given birth.


== Legacy ==


=== 19th century ===
An oil portrait of her by Francis Alexander was commissioned by her supporters in 1834. It is at Cornell University. A painted copy is in the Prudence Crandall Museum.The Glasgow Emancipation Society prepared the following piece of "plate" (silver), which a traveler to the U.S. was going to take to her:ToMlSS CRANDALL,
of Canterbury, Connecticut,
This small offering is presented,
With affectionate respect,
by
Female Friends in Glasgow;
In testimony of their high admiration of that ardent benevolence, heroic fortitude, and unflinching steadfastness, In the midst of wanton and unequalled persecution, Which Almighty God hath enabled her to display, In her disinterested and noble endeavors, Destined to be crowned with honor and triumph, To introduce into the privileges, and elevate in the scale, Of social and religious life, A long injured class of Her beloved Countrywomen. "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven."Glasgow, February, 1851.


=== 20th century ===
In the late 20th century, Crandall received renewed attention and honors: 

On February 21, 1965, the NBC television series Profiles in Courage broadcast an episode about her.
The Prudence Crandall House in Canterbury was acquired by the State of Connecticut in 1969.. Now a Connecticut state museum, it was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1991.
In 1973, the Prudence Crandall Center for Wonen, since 2003 the Prudence Crandall Center, Inc., was founded in New Britain, Connecticut to provide shelter for victims of domestic violence.
Crandall was the subject of a Walt Disney/NBC television movie entitled She Stood Alone (1991), in which she was portrayed by actress Mare Winningham.
In 1994 Crandall was inducted into the Connecticut Women's Hall of Fame.
In 1995, the Connecticut General Assembly designated Prudence Crandall as the state's official heroine.
In Enfield, Connecticut, the Prudence Crandall Elementary School in Enfield, Connecticut, opened in 1966.
In 2001 Crandall was inducted into the Rhode Island Heritage Hall of Fame.
In 2008, a statue of Crandall and a pupil was erected in the Connecticut state capital.The Episcopal Church (United States) remembers Crandall as a "teacher and prophetic witness". There is a prayer to be recited on September 3, her birthday.


== Historical marker ==
The following marker is at  Osage Street and Highway 190, Elk Falls, Kansas:     

In 1831, Prudence Crandall, educator, emancipator, and human rights advocate, established a school which in 1833 became the first Black female academy in New England at Canterbury, Connecticut. This later action resulted in her arrest and imprisonment for violating the "Black Law."
Although she was later released on a technicality, the school was forced to close after being harassed and attacked by a mob. She moved with her husband Reverend Calvin Philleo to Illinois.
After her husband died in 1874, she and her brother moved to a farm near Elk Falls. Prudence taught throughout her long life and was an outspoken champion for equality of education and the rights of women. In 1886, supported by Mark Twain and others, an annuity was granted to her by the Connecticut Legislature. She purchased a house in Elk Falls where she died January 27, 1890.
Over a hundred years later, legal arguments usef by her 1834 trial attorneys were submitted to the Supreme Court  during their consideration of the historic civil rights case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas.


== Archival material ==
The Linda Lear Center for Special Collections & Archives, at Connecticut College, in New London, Connecticut, has a Prudence Crandall Collection. It contains "23 letters and one manuscript of poems by Crandall, including three letters to the abolitionist Simeon Jocelyn detailing the opposition to her school. Most of the remaining letters are to her husband, Calvin Philleo. There are also nearly three dozen manuscripts of correspondence and business records of Philleo. The remainder of the collection consists of photographs of Crandall, her family members, and their places of residence and Helen Sellers' research materials and correspondence related to her biography."  The Lear Center has also posted a guide to other archival material of or relating to Crandall.Correspondence with William Garrison is in his papers in the Boston Public Library.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Crandall, Prudence (October 1949). "Letters of Prudence Crandall Philleo to George Harris Richardson". Negro History Bulletin. 13 (1). p. 15. JSTOR 44174848.
May, Samuel J. (1833). The right of colored people to education, vindicated : Letters to Andrew T. Judson, Esq. and others in Canterbury, remonstrating with them on their unjust and unjustifiable procedure relative to Miss Crandall and her school for colored females. Brooklyn, Connecticut.
Report of the trial of Miss Prudence Crandall : before the county court for Windham County, August term 1833 : on an information charging her with teaching colored persons not inhabitants of this state. Brooklyn, Connecticut. 1833. OCLC 164307687.
A member of the bar (1834). Report of the arguments of counsel, in the case of Prudence Crandall, plff. in error, vs. State of Connecticut : before the Supreme Court of Errors, at their session at Brooklyn, July term, 1834. Boston: Garrison and Knapp.


== External links ==
Jennifer Rycenga gives talk on Prudence Crandall, 2018 April 14, 2018, Otis Library, Norwich, Connecticut. Rycenga has published an article on Crandall (reference above) and is at work on a biography.
”From Canterbury to Little Rock: The Struggle for Educational Equality for African Americans”, a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan
"Prudence Crandall". Civil Rights Pioneer. Find a Grave. June 27, 2004.
"Hezekiah Crandall" (sister), Find a Grave.
"Calvin Wheeler Philleo (husband, 1822–1858)". Find a Grave