Mowden Hall School

Mowden Hall School is a co educational day and boarding preparatory school in Stocksfield, Northumberland, England approximately 11 miles (18 km) West of Newcastle upon Tyne. It has been part of the Cothill Educational Trust since 2007 and is a member of the Independent Association of Preparatory Schools (IAPS) and Association of Governing Bodies of Independent Schools (AGBIS).


== History ==
Mowden Hall School was founded in the eponymous Mowden Hall in Mowden, near Darlington, by Mr Frank Marchbank in 1935. The School was evacuated to Fallbarrow, Windermere, at the start of the war, before acquiring its present site at Newton Hall, near Newcastle upon Tyne, in 1945; the former building was home to the Department for Education and its predecessor agencies for almost fifty years. Mowden has welcomed girls since 1982, and opened a Pre-Prep Department in 1993.Much work was done in the School's early years at Newton to convert the former home of the Joicey family, which had been built in 1835 by the distinguished northern architect John Dobson, into a fully functioning prep school.


== Boarding ==
Full, weekly and flexi boarding are available to pupils in the main prep school (aged 8 and above). Boarders are not allowed to use mobile phones or other electronic devices, but are allowed and communicate with their parents by writing letters and payphones. Over three-quarters of the children in the Prep School board in some capacity. However, there is no compulsion to board at Mowden. Children can be Day Pupils, Flexi Boarders, Weekly Boarders or Full Boarders.


== Academic ==
Mowden offers a continuity of education from the Mowden Pre-preparatory School (ages 3–8), to Mowden's Preparatory School (ages 8–13).
The school has a history of high academic achievement across all age ranges. The curriculum is broad from a young age, offering a solid grounding in the sciences as well as in English and maths.
Language-learning is also encouraged from a young age, so too the teaching of Latin and French.


== Sport ==
A wide range of activities are available at the school: these include rugby, football, hockey, netball, tennis, cricket, athletics, badminton, cross-country, swimming. The school has extensive sporting fields, an indoor swimming pool,  tennis courts, and a multi-use astroturf pitch, which was completed in September 2016.
Internally the school also has sporting competitions between Houses, as well as swimming galas, cross-country running and a full summer Sports Day.


== Former pupils ==
Alexander Armstrong – actor, comedian and presenter
Julian Bicknell – architect
Andy Blyth – English premiership and England A rugby player
Pete Graves – television presenter and sports correspondent
Michael Jopling, Baron Jopling – former Conservative government minister
Jeremy Mallinson – conservationist
Peter Martell – journalist
Richard Smyth – cricketer


== References ==


== External links ==
School Website
Profile on the ISC website
Profile on the Good Schools Guide
Ofsted Boarding Inspection Reports
School Information