Jackie Aprile, Sr.

Giacomo Michael "Jackie" Aprile Sr., played by Michael Rispoli, is a fictional character on the HBO original series The Sopranos. He was the first acting boss of the DiMeo crime family, after longtime boss Ercole 'Eckley' DiMeo was sent to prison in 1995. He is loosely based on DeCavalcante crime family acting mob boss Giacomo "Jake" Amari.


== Plot details ==
According to Sopranos; A Family History, Giacomo Michael Aprile Sr. was born in 1955, was a close friend and contemporary of Tony Soprano and they came up through the ranks of the DiMeo Crime Family together. Jackie's older brother, Richie Aprile, also stepped up in the same crime family. Jackie was also the brother of Liz La Cerva and thus the uncle of Adriana La Cerva. Jackie and Tony, along with Silvio Dante and Ralph Cifaretto, were in their own small crew when they were younger moving weed and stolen goods. Around this time, Jackie had the idea to rob a card game held by capo Feech La Manna in order to make a name for themselves. After Jackie and Tony robbed the game, their brother and father respectively, intervened and returned some of the stolen money. Despite the robbery, both Tony and Jackie became rising stars in the crime family and were on the fast track to being made men. He established a company named after himself, Aprile Roofing Supply in Livingston, New Jersey.
Jackie's star rose considerably in the intervening years, during which he started a family. He married Rosalie Aprile, and they had three children together. Jackie never wanted his son Jackie Aprile Jr. to get involved in the Mafia, despite his success. Instead of going on vacation during Christmas 1995, he and Rosalie stay home with Jackie Jr. and hire him a tutor to help him with his SATs. When Big Puss complains about the financial strains of sending his sons to university and college, Jackie offers to loan him money. He and his older brother, Richie, appointed Aprile crew associate, Peter "Beansie" Gaeta, to peddle heroin for them, taking the largest cut for themselves. At some point Jackie served time in prison in United States Penitentiary, Lewisburg with the later identified informant Fabian "Febby" Petrullio. In the episode "Down Neck" AJ Soprano reads online that Jackie secretly ran the United Union of Roofers, Waterproofers and Allied Workers union and ripped off a pension fund. Tony said that Jackie did 'a couple of counts' in jail, suggesting that although he served prison time, he avoided any long sentences.
In 1990, Jackie became acting capo of the Aprile Crew following the imprisonment of his older brother. By the mid-1990s his influence, power and success continued to expand and he assumed the role of acting boss while Ercole 'Eckley' DiMeo went on trial and was subsequently sentenced to life in prison in 1995. He was considered an all-powerful figure in the crime family and was liked and respected by all his peers. Although Jackie ran the family, he never took the official boss title from DiMeo. His ascension to the top of the crime family greatly aggrieved Corrado "Junior" Soprano, who with his rank and seniority felt he was in line to become boss. Junior sometimes resented having to take orders from Aprile, who used to fetch Junior sambucas.
In 1995, Junior Soprano fell afoul of Jackie when he hijacked one of his trucks, refusing to acknowledge his position as acting boss. Junior fled to Boca Raton to avoid retaliation, although later met with Salvatore "Big Pussy" Bonpensiero, agreeing to attend a sit-down so that he and Jackie could resolve their dispute when his safety was guaranteed by his nephew.
However, despite leading the DiMeo family through a time of relative peace, Jackie's reign was short-lived. He was diagnosed with stomach cancer and hospitalized in Livingston, New Jersey late 1998 and by early 1999 (season one) was clearly fading fast. Paulie suggests that he looks into applying to be a clinical candidate for cancer stem cell research. Tony started assuming many of Jackie's responsibilities as a result.Jackie then made Tony his Acting/Street Boss. For a brief time in early 1999, Jackie's condition improved and he was out on the streets again. In "46 Long" Jackie mediated a dispute between Tony and Junior. However, his cancer had recurred and by "Denial, Anger, Acceptance" he was admitted to the hospital and his men often come to pay their respects. Jackie died of cancer in July 1999 leaving a power vacuum behind within the crime family. A war between Junior Soprano and Tony Soprano was anticipated, but immediately following Jackie's death, Tony met with his uncle and Junior became boss. However, Tony began running the family behind Junior's back with the support of the other family capos. This ruse is made easier since Junior had no idea how much money they were kicking up to Jackie.


== Appearances ==
Appears in: "46 Long", "Denial, Anger, Acceptance", "Meadowlands",  "…To Save Us All from Satan's Power"


== References ==