The Snow Goose: A Story of Dunkirk

The Snow Goose: A Story of Dunkirk is a novella by the American author Paul Gallico. It was first published in 1940 as a short story in The Saturday Evening Post, then he expanded it to create a short novella which was first published on April 7, 1941.


== Plot summary ==
The Snow Goose is a simple, short written parable on the regenerative power of friendship and love, set against a backdrop of the horror of war. It documents the growth of a friendship between Philip Rhayader, an artist living a solitary life in an abandoned lighthouse in the marshlands of Essex because of his disabilities, and a young local girl, Fritha. The snow goose, symbolic of both Rhayader (Gallico) and the world itself, wounded by gunshot and many miles from home, is found by Fritha and, as the human friendship blossoms, the bird is nursed back to flight, and revisits the lighthouse in its migration for several years. As Fritha grows up, Rhayader and his small sailboat eventually are lost in the Dunkirk evacuation, having saved several hundred men. The bird, which was with Rhayader, returns briefly to the grown Fritha on the marshes. She interprets this as Rhayader's soul taking farewell of her (and realizes she had come to love him). Afterwards, a German pilot destroys Rhayader's lighthouse and all of his work, except for one portrait Fritha saves after his death: a painting of her as Rhayader first saw her—a child, with the wounded snow goose in her arms.


== Reception ==
The Snow Goose was one of the O. Henry Prize Winners in 1941.Critic Robert van Gelder called it "perhaps the most sentimental story that ever has achieved the dignity of a Borzoi [prestige imprint of publisher Knopf] imprint. It is a timeless legend that makes use of every timeless appeal that could be crowded into it." A public library put it on a list of "tearjerkers". Gallico made no apologies, saying that in the contest between sentiment and 'slime', "sentiment remains so far out in front, as it always has and always will among ordinary humans that the calamity-howlers and porn merchants have to increase the decibels of their lamentations, the hideousness of their violence and the mountainous piles of their filth to keep in the race at all."


== Popular culture ==
In 1944, Ronald Colman read The Snow Goose on Silver Theater on CBS radio ( April 30, 1944).
In 1948, a spoken word recording featuring Herbert Marshall, with music by Victor Young was issued on Decca records.
In 1971, The Snow Goose directed by Patrick Garland, was released on BBC TV. This film, from a screenplay by Gallico, features Richard Harris and Jenny Agutter. It won a Golden Globe for Best Movie made for TV and was nominated for both a BAFTA and an Emmy, with Jenny Agutter winning for Outstanding Supporting Actress, and was shown in the US as part of the Hallmark Hall of Fame.
In 1976, Spike Milligan narrated an edited version, with music by Ed Welch, issued on RCA records.
In 1990, Ruth Cracknell narrated an edited version, with music by Ed Welch, issued on by EMI and ABC Records, and was nominated for the ARIA Award for Best Children's Album in 1992.
In 2002, William Fiennes published The Snow Geese – a travel book about the snow goose and its migrations. The author was inspired by reading The Snow Goose as a child.
In 2003, John Harvey and The Puppet Lab in Edinburgh, toured the UK with a puppet-adaptation of the book.
In 2014, an excerpt from The Snow Goose was set as a comprehension passage in the Annual ISC Examinations conducted by CISCE.
In 2016, author Michael Morpurgo acknowledged its influence on his much-loved War Horse in the foreword to the Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust's 70th anniversary republication of the 1946 edition, featuring illustrations by Peter Scott.


=== Musical adaptation ===
In 1975, the British progressive rock group Camel made an orchestrated instrumental album based on Gallico's novel, initially entitled The Snow Goose. Gallico threatened to sue the band for copyright infringement, and therefore the band had to change the title to Music Inspired by The Snow Goose. The album was a great success and established Camel, leading to a sell-out performance with the London Symphony Orchestra at the Royal Albert Hall, London, in October 1975, which was later released as part of their first live album A Live Record. Camel toured Europe in late 2013 and early 2014, performing the album in its entirety for the first time since 1975. In 2014, readers of Prog magazine voted it no. 31 in the Top 100 Prog Albums of All Time.In 1976, RCA released an LP with music written and orchestrated by Ed Welch and Spike Milligan.  Contributions were made by Harry Edgington and Alan Clare. The LP was produced by Stuart Taylor and Ed Welch for Quarry Productions Ltd with artistic direction from Spike Milligan. Gallico's original story was adapted for this recording by Spike Milligan in Australia in 1976. The music is published by Clowns Music Ltd. Spike Milligan provided the narration throughout. Virginia, the widow of Paul Gallico, co-operated in the project.


== Allusions and references to real things ==
The character Rhayader is loosely based on ornithologist, conservationist and painter Peter Scott, who also did the illustrations for the first illustrated English edition of the book, using his first wife Elizabeth Jane Howard as the model for Fritha. (Scott 1961, p. 543)
Rhayader is a town in Wales and also the Welsh word for waterfall.
The Snow-Goose is mentioned in J.M. Coetzee's novel Boyhood (1997)


== See also ==
Little Ships of Dunkirk


== References ==

Scott, Peter. (1961). The Eye of the Wind. An Autobiography. Hodder & Stoughton: London.


== Sources ==
"The Snow Goose", information at PaulGallico.info
The Snow Goose on Theatre Royal: April 18, 1954