The Snow Goose (film)

The Snow Goose is a 1971 British television drama film based on the 1941 novella The Snow Goose: A Story of Dunkirk by Paul Gallico. 
It won a Golden Globe for Best Miniseries or Television Film and was nominated for both a British Academy for Film and Television Award (BAFTA) and an Emmy, with Jenny Agutter winning for Best Supporting Actress. The film was shown in the United States on 15 November 1971 as part of the anthology series Hallmark Hall of Fame.


== Plot ==
The film follows the relationship between Fritha (Jenny Agutter), an orphaned young girl, and Philip Rhayader (Richard Harris), a lighthouse keeper in the fishing village Great Marsh in Essex in the United Kingdom. The two meet as Rhayader helps Fritha care for a snow goose she has found, despite his solitary lifestyle. The bird has been injured by hunters shooting at it.
Set at the beginning of World War II, the film uses the backdrop of the ongoing political events and battles throughout the narrative. As the goose heals, Fritha and the goose leave Rhayader. Rhayader once again becomes reclusive and confines himself to his lighthouse lodging.
As Germany invades Poland and the War begins, Rhayader applies to the Observer Corps but is denied due to his disabilities. Fritha and the goose eventually return to Rhayader, but Rhayader ventures out to rescue the British Expeditionary Force trapped on the beaches of Dunkirk. He becomes lost in the Dunkirk evacuation, and the goose returns to Fritha who is now grown up. She realises she had come to love Rhayader, and is able to save one of the paintings he had made of her, as a child with the wounded goose, before the lighthouse and all other artwork is obliterated by a German pilot.


== Cast ==
Richard Harris as Philip Rhayader
Jenny Agutter as Fritha
Graham Cowden as the recruiting officer
Freda Bamford as the postmistress
Noel Johnson as the naval captain
Gary Watson as the narrator
William Marlowe as a soldier


== References ==


== External links ==
The Snow Goose on IMDb
The Snow Goose, Hallmark Hall of Fame