Dutchess Stadium

Dutchess Stadium is a stadium in the town of Fishkill, New York. It opened in 1994 and holds 4,500 people. It is located on New York State Route 9D.
Visible from the stadium is Fishkill Correctional Facility as well as Interstate 84.  Construction began in January 1994 and was ready for Opening Day in June 1994.


== Uses ==
The stadium is primarily used for baseball, as the home field of the Hudson Valley Renegades minor league baseball team, the short season-A level team of the Tampa Bay Rays. Each April the stadium hosts the Hudson Valley Baseball Classic between Marist College and the United States Military Academy.  Besides baseball it is also used for weddings, catered events and concerts.  The stadium hosts K104's annual KFest concert held in early June, as well as a rock concert, usually held in late August. Performing artists have included Akon, Rihanna, Fat Joe, Counting Crows, Collective Soul, Wilco, Def Leppard, Bob Dylan, Drake and Adam Lambert, among others.
On July 15, 2014, it was announced that Manhattan College's baseball team will play all of their home competitions at Dutchess Stadium The stadium's first football tenant, the Hudson Valley Fort of the Fall Experimental Football League, took up residence in the stadium in October 2015. Some high school football playoff contests were also to be held at the stadium that year, but the stadium was later determined to be unsafe as a football venue and those games were canceled.


== Features ==
In addition to concessions, the stadium features a kids area, which includes an ice cream shop and play areas. The entire field, excluding the pitchers mound and home plate area, was converted to Astro-Turf in the spring of 2014.


== See also ==
List of NCAA Division I baseball venues


== References ==


== External links ==
Hudson Valley Renegades: Dutchess Stadium
Balkpark Reviews review of Dutchess Stadium
Dutchess Stadium Views - Ball Parks of the Minor Leagues
Stadium Review and Photos of Dutchess Stadium
Dutchess Stadium and the Hudson Valley Renegades Review: A Wedding and a Ball Game