The George Washington Hotel (Winchester, Virginia)

The George Washington Hotel is a historic hotel located in downtown Winchester, Virginia. It was built in 1924 by The American Hotel Corporation, as part of their "Colonial Chain" of hotels. Like many hotels of the era, the property was built in close proximity of a B&O train station and was constructed to provide lodging to railroad passengers.


== Original hotel ==
Originally the five story hotel was built in the shape of an "L", with a rear one-story kitchen wing. It contained 102 rooms and 45 baths. The lowest level contained a barber-shop, cafeteria, candy shop and men's furnishing shop. In 1929 an additional wing was added to the hotel, which provided 50 more guestrooms.In 1950 the property was remodeled to include a Howard Johnson's restaurant.The property remained a vital part of downtown Winchester, Virginia and has in the past been home to the headquarters of the Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival. Over the years, a number of notable people have stayed at The George Washington Hotel. Guests have included Lucille Ball and Jack Dempsey among many others.


== Changing times ==
With the construction of interstate highways and widespread availability of motor cars, railroad travel began to decline. Undoubtedly, this change in travel, contributed to the closing of the property in 1978.
It was then operated as The George Washington Home for Adults from 1978 to 1993. The property then lay vacant until 2004. That year it was purchased and renovation work began which lasted until the property reopened in April 2008. The property has undergone a complete renovation and revitalization. It now includes 90 guestrooms, an indoor pool and hot tub, fitness room, restaurant "Georges Food And Spirits". It operates under the name The George Washington Hotel – A Wyndham Grand Hotel. The property contains all the amenities of today, while capturing the historical elements which make it so unique.It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2010.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website