Turn Back Time (Aqua song)

"Turn Back Time" is a song by Danish dance-pop group Aqua, released as their seventh single overall, and the sixth from their debut album Aquarium. The song became another worldwide hit for the group, and was included on the Sliding Doors soundtrack.


== Composition ==
"Turn Back Time" possesses less of a bubble pop sound than Aqua's other releases; it is slow-paced and shows the full range of Lene Nystrøm Rasted's vocals but maintains the Aqua sound. The song samples the Pet Shop Boys' 1988 single "Heart".


== Release ==
The song featured on the soundtrack for the 1998 film Sliding Doors, and was released across the world the same year. In Japan, "Turn Back Time" was released along with "My Oh My". The song subsequently gained far more radio airplay than their other releases.
The Gavin Report wrote about the song: "Time to take it downtempo, and this standout track from Aquarium contains all the elements necessary to quickly float to the top. More than a handful of PDs and MDs consider this ballad to have Number One potential. This is an impressive display of the Danish group's versatility."


== Commercial performance ==
The single is their third number one single in the United Kingdom. On its May 1998 UK release, the song topped the charts for one week, making Aqua one of the few groups to have their first three singles all make number one. This single reached #18 on Billboard's Top 40 Mainstream chart and therefore was their second highest charting hit in the United States.


== Music video ==
The video for the release contained footage from Sliding Doors, and was therefore a departure from the campy and humorous style by the group. There are two different edits of this video, one contains more clips from the film. In the video, the doppelgänger of the lead singer Lene Nystrøm is chasing her in the London Underground. Much of the video was filmed on the abandoned platform 5 at Holborn tube station.


== Track listing ==
UK CD Single (CD1)

"Turn Back Time" (Original Version) 4:08
"Turn Back Time" (Love To Infinity's Classic Radio Mix) 3:20
"Turn Back Time" (Metro Scuba Club Mix) 6:34
"Turn Back Time" (Master Mix) 5:13
"Turn Back Time" (Thunderball Mix) 6:59UK CD single (CD2)
"Turn Back Time" (original version) – 4:08
"Turn Back Time" (Metro Radio Edit) – 3:22
"Turn Back Time" (Love to Infinity's Classic Paradise Mix) – 7:29
"Turn Back Time" (CD-ROM video)Sweden CD single

"Turn Back Time" (Original Version) 4:10
"Turn Back Time" (Love To Infinity's Classic Radio Mix) 3:17
"Turn Back Time" (Love To Infinity's Classic Paradise Mix) 7:25Denmark CD single

"Turn Back Time" (Original Version) 4:10
"Turn Back Time" (Love To Infinity's Classic Radio Mix) 3:20Scandinavia CD single

"Turn Back Time" (Album Version) 4:08
"Turn Back Time" (Classic Radio Mix) 3:21Australian CD single

"Turn Back Time" (Album Version) 4:09
"Turn Back Time" (Love To Infinity's Classic Radio Mix) 3:20
"Turn Back Time" (Love To Infinity's Classic Paradise Mix) 7:25
"Turn Back Time" (Metro Scuba Club Mix) 6:34Japanese CD single

"Turn Back Time" (Original Version) 4:09
"Turn Back Time" (Love To Infinity's Classic Radio Mix) 3:20
"My Oh My" (Radio Edit) 3:24
"My Oh My" (Spike, Clyde'N'Eightball Club Mix) 5:04


== Charts and certifications ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Lyrics of this song at MetroLyrics