University of Turku

The University of Turku (in Finnish Turun yliopisto, in Swedish Åbo universitet, shortened in UTU), located in Turku in southwestern Finland, is the third largest university in the country as measured by student enrollment, after the University of Helsinki and Tampere University. It was established in 1920 and also has facilities at Rauma, Pori, Kevo and Salo. The university is a member of the Coimbra Group.


== History ==


=== The Royal Academy of Turku ===

The first university to be established in Turku was The Royal Academy of Turku, in 1640, which was transferred to the new Capital, Helsinki, after the Great Fire of Turku in 1827.
Three famous Finns began their studies in Turku in 1822. These were Johan Vilhelm Snellman, Elias Lönnrot, and Johan Ludvig Runeberg who have a statue on University Hill. Another reminder of the Royal Academy is the Old Academy Building near the University's campus.


=== The University of Turku ===

The modern University of Turku was founded in 1920. The Finnish intelligentsia wanted a purely Finnish university, the first of its kind in Finland. 22,040 people contributed to the fund-raising campaign. Newly gained independence and the campaign are reflected in the motto of the University about a free people's gift to free science. To honour the memory of these donors, the University has named its specially created liqueur "22 040". Developed by the University's own food chemists, the liqueur does homage to some of the distinctive fruits of the Finnish landscape: the cloudberry, the rowan and the sea buckthorn.
The first premises of the University of Turku were in the centre of the city, by the market square. In the 1950s a new campus was built on Ryssänmäki (Russian Hill – now known as University Hill). In the 1960s the University started to expand rapidly, a process that still continues.
The University was made a public institution in 1974.Since 1995 the University of Turku has been a member of the Coimbra Group.
In January 2010, the Turku School of Economics merged with the University of Turku, forming a seventh faculty of the university.


== Enrollment ==
The University has approximately 20,000 students, of which 5,000 are postgraduate students having completed their MSc or MA. The largest faculties are the Faculty of Humanities and the Faculty of Science and Technology.


== Organisation ==

The university management consists of the Board, The Rector and the vice rectors and the University Collegiate Council.
The Board is the highest decision-making organ of the University and is made up of 10 individuals both from academia, society and studentship. It develops the University's operating processes and approves plans concerning its financing and activities; it decide on the guidelines of granting appropriations; it give its opinion in any matters of significance that concern the University in principle and the Board approves the service regulations and other similar rules.
The Rector directs the activities and processes of the University and solves any issues concerning its general management. The Rector represents the University and uses the University's right to speak in courts of law and in dealings with the authorities. Professor Kalervo Väänänen is currently the elected Rector.The University Collegiate Council consists of 30 members: ten professors, ten other teaching and research personnel and other staff and ten students.The university is divided into seven faculties. All departments and some of their research units are listed under the faculty header.

Faculty of HumanitiesSchool of History, Cultural Research and Art Studies
School of Languages and Translation Studies
Faculty of Science and EngineeringDepartment of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry
Department of Biology
Department of Chemistry
Department of Geography and Geology
Department of Future Technologies
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Biodiversity Unit of the University of Turku
Faculty of MedicineInstitute of Biomedicine
Institute of Dentistry
Turku Biomaterials Centre
Department of Nursing Science
Department of Clinical Medicine
Special Units
Functional Foods Forum
The Research Centre for Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine (CAPC)
Research Centre for Child Psychiatry
Turku Brain and Mind Center (TBMC)
Turku Institute for Child and Youth Research (CYRI)
Turku PET Centre
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Social SciencesDepartment of Psychology and Speech-Language Pathology
KiVa antibullying program
Multiprofessional teaching clinic
Centre for Learning Research
Turku Brain and Mind Center
Department of Philosophy, Contemporary History and Political Science
Finnish Centre for Democracy Studies
Centre for Parliamentary Studies
Public Choice Research Centre
John Morton Center for North American Studies
Department of Social Research
Turku Center for Welfare Research
Faculty of EducationDepartment of Education
Department of Teacher Education Turku
Department of Teacher Education Rauma
Teacher training school in Turku
Teacher training school in Rauma
Centre for Research on Lifelong Learning and Education
Centre for Learning Research
Turku School of Economics
Department of Management and Entrepreneurship
Department of Accounting and Finance
Department of Marketing and International Business
Department of Economics
Finland Futures Research Centre
Centre for Collaborative ResearchThe university also has number of independent units not affiliated with the faculties:
Brahea Centre of University of Turku
Areal Research and Development
Centre for Maritime Studies
Centre for Language and Communication Studies
Finnish Centre for Astronomy with ESO
Turku Bioscience Centre
Turku PET CentreIn addition to being a destination for international exchange, the University also has several English-language master's degree programmes and one Finnish-language master's degree programme for international degree students:
Biomedical Sciences: Biomedical Imaging
Biomedical Sciences:Drug Discovery and Development
Biomedical Sciences: Medicinal and RadioPharmaceutical Chemistry
Biomedical Sciences: Molecular Biotechnology and Diagnostics
Digital Health and Life Sciences:Health Technology
Digital Health and Life Sciences: Medical Analytics and Health Internet-of-things
Digital Health and Life Sciences: Molecular Systems Biology
East Asian Studies
Education and Learning
Embedded Computing
Food Development
Future Health and Technology
Futures Studies
Gender Studies
Global Innovation Management
Human Neuroscience
Information Security and Cryptography: Cryptography and Data Security
Information Security and Cryptography: Security of Networked Systems
Law and Information Society
Nordic Cultural and Social Resilience
Physical and Chemical Sciences: Astronomy and Space Physics
Physical and Chemical Sciences: Materials Chemistry
Physical and Chemical Sciences: Materials Physics
Physical and Chemical Sciences: Theoretical Physics
Software Engineering
Suomen ja sen sukukielten maisteriohjelma (Finnish and Other Finno-Ugric Languages)


== Campus area ==
The University of Turku shares a campus with Åbo Akademi University and elements of Turku Science Park. The area also encompasses Turku University Hospital (TYKS) and the Student Village. The Main Building and the surrounding complex was built in the fifties on what became to be known as the University Hill. The campus is constantly expanding, the latest example is the Medisiina D building which houses the facilities of the Faculty of Medicine. The University also owns the Botanic Garden at Ruissalo as well as the research station at the Island of Seili.


== Research ==
As defined in the strategy, the University's multidisciplinary strengths in research are biofuture; digital futures; cultural memory and social change; children, young people and learning; drug development and diagnostics; and sea and maritime studies.
The University of Turku has been involved in many research projects in the Peruvian Amazon. With the Peruvian Amazon Research Institute (Instituto de Investigaciones de la Amazonía Peruana - IIAP), based in Iquitos, has been studying the Amazon in the BIODAMAZ Project.


== Famous alumni ==
Sauli Niinistö – Current President of Finland
Liisa Hyssälä – Minister of Health and Social Services
Mauno Koivisto – Ninth President of Finland
Paula Lehtomäki – Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Timo Airaksinen – Professor of Moral Philosophy
Pekka Puska – Physician and Politician
Jarmo Viinanen – Secretary General of the Presidential Office
Heli Laaksonen – Popular poet writing in her native dialect
Kaisa Sofia Matomaki – SASTRA Ramanujan Prize winner 2016
Kimmo Innanen – astrophysicist
Joonas "Regalis" Rikkonen - Video game designer


== Rectors ==


== Chancellors ==
The Chancellor, appointed by the President of Finland upon proposal of the Finnish Government, was to promote science and scholarship, look after the general interests of the University and supervise its activities. The Chancellor confirmed the standing orders and other corresponding general regulations of the University. The most visible task of the Chancellor was the appointment of the Professors and the Docents of the University. Professor Pekka Puska was the last person to hold this position until it was abolished based on the decision of the University Board. The duties were reassigned to the Rector.


== See also ==
List of modern universities in Europe (1801–1945)


== References ==


== External links ==
The University of Turku
Turku Centre for Computer Science (TUCS)