Clement Walker Heneage

Major Clement Walker-Heneage, VC (6 March 1831 – 9 December 1901) was an English recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.


== Early life ==
Walker-Heneage was born in 1831, the eldest son of George Heneage Walker-Heneage, Member of Parliament for Devizes 1838-1857.


== Army career ==
Entering the army, he served with the 8th Hussars in the Crimean War (1853–56), and was present at many engagements of that campaign, including the battles of Alma, Balaclava, Inkerman, Tchernaïa, and the Siege of Sevastopol. He rode in the Charge of the Light Brigade at the Battle of Balaclava.At the close of the Crimean war he proceeded to India with his regiment, which took part in suppressing the Indian Mutiny (1857–58) in Rajputana and Central India. He was present at the capture of Kotah, the reoccupation of Chundaree, the battle of Kotah ke Serai, the capture of Gwalior and of Powree, the battle of Sindwaho, and the action of Koorwye and Naharghur


=== Victoria Cross ===
Walker-Heneage was 27 years old, and a captain in the 8th Hussars, British Army, during the Indian Mutiny when the following deed took place for which he was awarded the VC.
On 17 June 1858 at Gwalior, British India, Captain Heneage - together with Sergeant Joseph Ward, Farrier George Hollis and Private John Pearson - was in a charge made by a squadron of the 8th Hussars.
His citation reads:

8th Hussars, Captain (now Brevet-Major) Clement Walker Heneage
Selected for the Victoria Cross by their companions in the gallant charge made by a squadron of the Regiment at Gwalior, on the 17th of June, 1858, when, supported by a division of the Bombay Horse Artillery, and Her Majesty's 95th Regiment, they routed the enemy, who were advancing against Brigadier Smith's position, charged through the rebel camp into two batteries, capturing and bringing into their camp two of the enemy's guns, under a heavy and converging fire from the Fort and Town.
(Field Force Orders by Major-General Sir Hugh Henry Rose, G.C.B., Commanding Central India Field Force, dated Camp, Gwalior, 28th June, 1858.)


== Later life ==
Walker-Heneage retired from the army in 1868. He succeeded to the family estates on his father's death in 1875, and "devoted himself to the life and duties of a country gentleman" in Wiltshire. He was appointed High Sheriff of Wiltshire for 1887.He died, suddenly, at his residence Compton House, Compton Bassett, Wiltshire, on 9 December 1901, and is buried in St Swithin's churchyard, Compton Bassett.


== Family ==
Walker-Heneage married, in 1865, Henrietta Vivian, daughter of H. Vivian, of Singleton, Glamorgan, with whom he had one daughter and four sons. Their son Algernon became a Royal Navy admiral.


== References ==