Baclaran LRT Station

Baclaran station is a station on the Manila Light Rail Transit System Line 1. The station is located on the last stretches of Taft Avenue in Pasay, right at the border with Baclaran, Para単aque, and, like all other stations on the Line 1, Baclaran terminal is above-ground on viaduct.  The terminal is named after the famous shopping district of the same name, which is located on the borders of the cities of Pasay and Para単aque.
Baclaran is one of the four Line 1 stations serving Pasay City, the others are Gil Puyat, Libertad and EDSA. It is the southern terminus of Line 1, where trains from Roosevelt terminate. The line's depot, where its trains are stored, maintained and cleaned, is located near the terminal.
The terminal is near one of the country's most famous landmarks, the National Shrine of Our Mother of Perpetual Help, home of Our Mother of Perpetual Help. It is also near to the numerous dry goods and flea markets (tiangges), selling everything from clothes and electronics to home decorations and traditional medicine.


== Transportation links ==
Baclaran Terminal is a major transportation hub, with many buses and jeepneys terminating here. Buses coming from the terminal usually head to points south of Manila and the province of Cavite. Jeepneys that terminate here usually head to various destinations in Metro Manila (Las Pi単as, Para単aque, and Muntinlupa to the south; Manila, Pasay, Quezon City, and Caloocan to the north), and the province of Cavite. Taxis also ply for hire near the station, with dedicated taxis available for passengers heading to the Ninoy Aquino International Airport, which is only about two (2) kilometers from the station.  Cycle rickshaws can also be used to navigate the interior streets of Baclaran from the station.


== Future ==
The station is set to be the transfer point for the Line 1 South Extension, also known as the South Extension Project or Cavite Extension Project, which actual construction officially started on May 7, 2019 because the Right-of-way is "free and clear" from obstructions. The actual construction will start from Baclaran to Sucat. The line is set to extend all the way to Bacoor in Cavite, with the first station south of Baclaran being Redemptorist station.


== Incidents ==
A fire blazed at a shopping mall in Baclaran around 5 a.m. January 3, 2008. Windy weather fanned the flames and brought smoke to the Baclaran terminal up to the next station at EDSA Taft.


== See also ==
List of rail transit stations in Metro Manila
Manila Light Rail Transit System


== References ==