Well-known text representation of coordinate reference systems

A spatial reference system (SRS) or coordinate reference system (CRS) is a coordinate-based local, regional or global system used to locate geographical entities.  A spatial reference system defines a specific map projection, as well as transformations between different spatial reference systems. Spatial reference systems are defined by the OGC's Simple Feature Access using well-known text representation of coordinate reference systems, and support has been implemented by several standards-based geographic information systems. Spatial reference systems can be referred to using a SRID integer, including EPSG codes defined by the International Association of Oil and Gas Producers.
It is specified in ISO 19111:2007 Geographic information—Spatial referencing by coordinates, prepared by ISO/TC 211, also published as OGC Abstract Specification, Topic 2: Spatial referencing by coordinate.


== Components ==
In this Abstract Specification, a coordinate reference system shall be composed of one coordinate system and one datum.
A coordinate system is a set of mathematical rules for specifying how coordinates are to be assigned to points, such as: affine, cylindrical, Cartesian, ellipsoidal, linear, polar, spherical, vertical, etc.
A datum is a set of parameters that define the position of the origin, the scale, and the orientation of a coordinate system.
The main subtypes of coordinate reference system are: geodetic, vertical, engineering, and image; additional subtypes are: derived, projected, and compound.


== Examples ==
Some systems are:

Universal Transverse Mercator coordinate system
British national grid reference system
Hellenic Geodetic Reference System 1987
Irish grid reference system
Irish Transverse Mercator
Israeli Transverse Mercator
Israeli Cassini Soldner
Jordan Transverse Mercator
Lambert conformal conic projection
International mapcode system
Military Grid Reference System
United States National Grid


== Identifiers ==
A Spatial Reference System Identifier (SRID) is a unique value used to unambiguously identify projected, unprojected, and local spatial coordinate system definitions. These coordinate systems form the heart of all GIS applications.
Virtually all major spatial vendors have created their own SRID implementation or refer to those of an authority, such as the EPSG Geodetic Parameter Dataset.
SRIDs are the primary key for the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) spatial_ref_sys metadata table for the Simple Features for SQL Specification, Versions 1.1 and 1.2,  which is defined as follows:

In spatially enabled databases (such as IBM DB2, IBM Informix, Ingres, Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, Oracle RDBMS, Teradata, PostGIS, SQL Anywhere and Vertica), SRIDs are used to uniquely identify the coordinate systems used to define columns of spatial data or individual spatial objects in a spatial column (depending on the spatial implementation).  SRIDs are typically associated with a well-known text (WKT) string definition of the coordinate system (SRTEXT, above).
Here are two common coordinate systems with their EPSG SRID value followed by their WKT:
UTM, Zone 17N, NAD27 — SRID 2029:

WGS84 — SRID 4326  

SRID values associated with spatial data can be used to constrain spatial operations — for instance, spatial operations cannot be performed between spatial objects with differing SRIDs in some systems, or trigger coordinate system transformations between spatial objects in others.


== See also ==
Engineering datum
Geodesy
Georeferencing
Geographic coordinate systems
Geographic information system (GIS).
Grid reference
List of National Coordinate Reference Systems


== References ==


== External links ==
spatialreference.org – A website that defines spatial reference systems, in a variety of formats.
OpenGIS Specifications (Standards)
OpenGIS Simple Features Specification for CORBA (99-054)
OpenGIS Simple Features Specification for OLE/COM (99-050)
OpenGIS Simple Features Specification for SQL (99-054, 05-134, 06-104r3)
OGR — library implementing relevant OGC standards
EPSG Geodetic Parameter Registry, search engine for EPSG defined reference systems
Galdos Systems INdicio CRS Registry