Village development committee (India)

A Village Development Committee (VDC) (Nepali: गाउँ विकास समिति; gāun bikās samiti) in Nepal was the lower administrative part of its Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development. Each district had several VDCs, similar to municipalities but with greater public-government interaction and administration. There were 3,157 village development committees in Nepal. Each VDC was further divided into several wards (Nepali: वडा) depending on the population of the district, the average being nine wards. 

 The ward chairman of Laxmipur is Kapildev Yadav.


== Purpose ==
The purposes of a VDC were:

to organize village people structurally at a local level
to create a partnership between the community and the public sector for element of control and responsibility in development
to ensure proper use and distribution of state funds
to ensure a greater interaction between government officials, NGOs and agencies


== Organization ==
In a VDC, there was one elected chief, usually elected with an over 80% majority. A chief was elected from each ward. With these, there were four members elected or nominated. To keep data and records, and to manage administrative works, there was one village secretary. The position was a permanent appointment by the government, from whom they received a salary. The ward members, ward chief, and VDC chiefs were not paid a salary, but they obtained money according to presence. VDCs were guided from the district development committee, headquarters, and the chief of DDC was a local development officer (LDO). Population and housing details of VDCs in Nepal were provided by the National Population and Housing Census, in 1991, 2001 and 2011.


== Dissolution of VDC ==
The Village Development Committee (VDC) was dissolved on 10 March 2017 to be replaced by the Gaunpalika. Previously, the Panchayat was dissolved and turned into the VDC by the Constitution of Nepal 1990.


== See also ==
palakot wodapalika (पालाकोट वडापालिका)
Land-use planning
List of village development committees of Nepal
Rural community council England
Village Development Committee (India)


== References ==